---------cosco_csr_report_2017-------
 CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED
SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2017
 1

About this Report
Introduction
This report is the second sustainability report issued by China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited for all stakeholders, and it discloses the opportunities and challenges encountered by the Group in achieving sustainable development and social responsibility.
Period
The majority of this report is based on business data from January 1, 2017 and December 31, 2017.
Scope
The information and contents disclosed in this report cover China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited and its affiliated companies. If some information and content are only relevant to affiliated companies, such will be indicated.
Basis
This report has been compiled with reference to the Global Reporting Initiative's Sustainability Reporting Standards (GRI Standards) of Global Sustainability Standard Board (GSSB), GB/ T 36001 Guidance on Social Responsibility Reporting, ISO 26000: Guidance on Social Responsibility (2010), the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the United Nations.
Sources
The information and data disclosed in this report have been derived from internal documents and relevant statistical data from China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited.
Appellations
For enhanced readability, "China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited" shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING", "we", and "the Group" in this report. "COSCO SHIPPING Lines Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Lines". "COSCO SHIPPING Energy Transportation Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Energy". "COSCO SHIPPING Bulk Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Bulk". "COSCO SHIPPING Development Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Development". "COSCO SHIPPING Logistics Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Logistics". "COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers". "COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry". "Piraeus Container Terminal S.A." shall be referred to as "PCT". "COSCO SHIPPING Leasing Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Leasing". "Nantong COSCO KHI Ship Engineering Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "NACKS".
Form and Method of Acquisition
This report is issued in both English and Chinese. If there should be any inconsistency or ambiguity between the two versions, the Chinese report shall prevail. The electronic version of this report is made available for download from the China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited website at:http://www.coscoshipping.com/
COSCO SHIPPING WeChat Public Account
 2
  Contents
About this Report 02 Messages from Executives 05 About Us 06 Company profile 14 Social Responsibility Management 16
Responsibility Focus I : Piraeus Port 18 Responsibility Focus II : Concentrating Efforts on 22 Poverty Alleviation
Innovation - Stimulating the Momentum for 28 Continuous Expansion
Coordination - Coordinating Forces for 36 Sustainable Development
Green Development - Embracing the Earth Blue 46 Seas and Skies
Opening Up - Sailing the Maritime Silk Road 54 Sharing - Making Joint Efforts to Build a Better Future 64
Prospects for 2018 78 Expert Review 80 GRI Content Index 82 Reader Feedback Questionnaire 85
     3

 45
Messages from Executives
Chairman of China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited Xu Lirong
Message from the Chairman
The world is undergoing major adjustments. The multipolarization, economic globalization, society informatization, and cultural diversity have seen further advancement, with accelerated change of global governance systems and international order. As a massive state-owned enterprise directly managed by China's central government, COSCO SHIPPING stays true to its mission, closely links its development with the advancement of the shipping industry, the national destiny and the great rejuvenation of China, unswervingly shoulders economic, social and environmental responsibilities and strives to achieve sustainable and healthy development. It is committed to becoming a better performer of national policies, a better service provider for customers, a better partner for suppliers and a better career development platform for employees, and shaping the new ecology and new pattern of the shipping industry chain.
In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING sped up the development of "6 + 1" industrial clusters, tapped advantages of the whole industry chain, and leveraged scale, synergy of business segments and the industrial cluster advantages to continuously fulfill the five development concepts of "innovation, coordination, green development, opening up and sharing". We adhere to the innovation-driven development strategy, and constantly strengthen technological innovation, business model innovation and cultivation of innovative staff, thus enhancing the Group's capability of innovation and development. We attach great importance to safety production and the improvement of customer service capabilities, and help achieve mutual benefits and industry prosperity with the mutually beneficial cooperation mentality, and promote the optimization of coordinated development pattern in China and the world. We pursue green
and healthy ecological homes, practice energy conservation and environmental protection, protect marine biodiversity, and strive to build green shipping. We keep an open mind, act as the main force in the implementation of the Belt and Road initiative, improve and optimize the global business distribution, actively fulfill the needs of the country, and enhance the international voice and influence. We have paid attention to the people's growing needs for a better life and are dedicated to promoting employee growth and social harmony.
From the Huangpu River to the Hudson River, from Eurasia to north and south Americas, COSCO SHIPPING is making unremitting efforts to build a world-class enterprise with international competitiveness, and fulfill our common dream with hard work. With great aspirations, one will overcome whatever difficulties to reach the destination no matter how far it is. The new era is showing a new atmosphere, and we will create new glory on the new journey, reshape the global shipping pattern and become the world's leading international shipping giant. Already, COSCO SHIPPING has weighed anchor and set sail.
In the future, COSCO SHIPPING will continue to uphold the new development idea and the social responsibility concept of "Creating Values, Bridging Dreams", integrate business operations with legal, economic, social, and environmental responsibilities, and create and maximize the social value while maintaining responsible operations. With the spirit of unremitting efforts and pressing forward with indomitable will, we will make outstanding contribution to creating the epic saga of the Chinese nation in the new era.

 About Us
Company Profile
China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited, headquartered in Shanghai, is a large state-owned enterprise under direct central management, restructured from the former China Ocean Shipping (Group) Company and the former China Shipping (Group) Company. Upholding the concept of "One Team, One Culture, One Goal, and One Dream", COSCO SHIPPING endeavors to become an outstanding enterprise that is more scaled- up, more globalized, more competitive, and more valuable, as well as a better practitioner of national initiatives, a better service provider for customers, a better partner for suppliers and a better career development platform for employees.
Organizational Structure
Group Party Committee
Board of Directors
Managers
Board of Supervisors
       Four cultural objects
                      6
6
7
Sharing Center
Other Institutions
7
One culture
Creating a culture of common destiny
One team
01
03
Building an excellent team that is proactive and enterprising
02
04
One goal
Becoming industry world-leader
One dream
Achieving excellence
Integrated Management Office (IMO) Legal and Risk Management Division
Public Relations Division
Technology and Informatization Management Division
Financial Management Division
Capital Operations Division
Strategy and Corporate Management Division
Safety Supervision Division (Emergency Command Center)
Operations Management Division
Board of Directors
Party Committee Discipline Inspection Group
Work Department / Supervision and Audit Department
Human Resources Division / Organization Division Party Committee Inspection Group
Trade Union
Party Committee Work Department

   Our Vision
The vision of COSCO SHIPPING is to undertake the mission of globalizing economy, consolidate advantageous resources, take global shipping, integrated logistics and shipping related financial services as core business, and develop diversified industrial clusters, so as to build a world-leading business entity that provides integrated logistics and supply chain services.
Focusing on four strategic dimensions, which are "scale growth, profitability, anti-cyclical capability and building a global company", the Group highlights the "6+1" industrial clusters layout. The "6" is shipping, finance, logistics,equipment manufacturing, shipping services, and social services industrial clusters. The "1" means "Internet Plus" business based on business model innovation. This layout will help facilitate the integration of shipping factors and build a world-class logistics service provider.
v
Shipping Industrial Cluster
It includes container shipping, dry bulk cargo shipping, oil & LNG shipping, passenger liner and terminal investment and operation. Currently, the Group is committed to building the world's largest integrated shipping company.
  Equipment Manufacturing Industrial Cluster
Its business scope covers ship building, marine engineering manufacturing, ship repair and container manufacturing. Currently, the Group is committed to sharpening its leading edge in terms of core technologies and market share in offshore equipment and ship manufacturing and other related fields.
 Shipping Service Industrial Cluster
It includes ship management, seafarer labor service, ship spare parts procurement, conduction technology management, and fuel and material supply. Currently, the Group is aimed at guaranteeing services for the shipping industry, developing third party clients and providing necessary support for the mainstream shipping business.
 It includes ship chartering, shipping insurance, supply chain finance, logistics center investment, equity investment and assets investment mainly including the Belt and Road infrastructure investment. Currently, the Group is committed to building an integrated shipping finance service provider.
Shipping Finance Industrial Cluster
 The social services provided include immovable property investment management, real estate development, hotel management, hospitals and schools. Currently, the Group is developing this cluster into an incubator for new industries and a base for professional training.
Social Services Industrial Cluster
 Internet + businesses based on business model innovation will serve new industrial forms with big data to realize integrated application of Internet resources and shipping elements. Currently, the Group is carrying out Internet + businesses based on innovation to propel upgrading and transformation of all our business segments.
"Internet Plus" Business
 It includes project logistics, specialized and general cargo transportation, freight forwarding, storage facilities, multimodal transport, vessel agency, tally, etc. Currently, the Group is tapping into and fostering logistics business with core advantages to build a world-class integrated logistics service provider.
Logistics Industrial Cluster
    89

 Global Routes & Ports
Port
Ports of COSCO SHIPPING Routes of COSCO SHIPPING
 Qinzhou
Guangzhou
Kaohsiung
Qinhuangdao
Panjin Yingkou
Dalian Tianjin
Qingdao
Lianyungang
Zhangjiagang Taicang
Shanghai Ningbo
Quanzhou
Jinjiang Xiamen
Shenzhen Hong Kong
Yangzhou Nanjing
Zeebrugge Bilbao
Antwerpen
Port Said
Istanbul
Khalifa Port
Pusan
Seattle
Los Angeles Los Beach
Singapore
 1
10
01
1
1
1
  Rotterdam
Piraeus VadoValencia

   Data 2017
Business Ability
Indicator
Number of ships
Deadweight tonnage of ships
Container fleet capacity
Dry bulk fleet capacity
Tanker fleet capacity
General cargo and specialized cargo fleet capacity
Global container terminals
Business Performance
Indicator
Total turnover of transportation
Quantity of shipments
Container transport volume
The container throughput of terminals
The global sales volume of its ship bunker fuel
2017
26.44 million TEU 104.25 million TEU 27.83 million tons
2016
24.46 million TEU >102.05 million TEU >25 million tons
Informational Note
TEU stands for Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit. To facilitate the calculation of the number of containers, twenty-foot containers are taken as a standard and are usually used to indicate the ability of a ship to load containers, which is also an important statistics and conversion unit for container and port throughput.
      2.914
2.6461
   2017
1,123 ships ranking No.1 in the world
86.35 million DWT ranking No.1 in the world
2016
991ships ranking No.1 in the world
77.34 million DWT ranking No.1 in the world
1.745 million TEU with 319 vessels ranking the fourth in the world
38.065 million DWT with 453 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
18.197million DWT with 138 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
3.361million DWT with128 ships ranking No.1 in the world
51wharfs
billion tons of sea miles 1,084.25 million tons
billion tons of sea miles 812.02 million tons
       1.895 million TEU with 371vessels ranking the fourth in the world
38.11 million DWT with 422 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
20.92 million DWT with 155 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
4.61million DWT with175 ships ranking No.1 in the world
55 wharfs
Employee Development and Care
Investment toward employee assistance
    2017 2016
61.62million yuan 25.623 million yuan
  Philanthropy
Investment toward target-oriented poverty alleviation
      2017 2016
38.997million yuan 35.4205 million yuan
    12
13

Corporate Governance
Risk Management
COSCO Shipping has established a unified risk management concept: institutionalized management, standardized institution, platform- based operation, informationized platform, systematized governance, and internationalized system. Based on a collaborative sharing, comprehensive balancing and self-management working mechanism, we are actively promoting risk management and involved system construction, cultural construction, team building, and capacity building, among many other similar efforts, thus laying a solid foundation for corporate governance.
We studied and drafted the Measures of Party Committee Discipline Inspection Group of COSCO SHIPPING on Establishing the "Anti-corruption Institutional Mechanism" and have drawn up plans for the construction of the "Anti-corruption" system.
A series of institutional documents such as the Measures of Party Committee Discipline Inspection Group of COSCO SHIPPING on Conducting Party Conduct and Clean Government Talks were introduced to promote the institutionalization and standardization of the Group's party conduct and clean government construction and anti-corruption work.
More than 200 integrity files of the Group management cadres including leadership members of the secondary units have been created to timely learn about their integrity performance and assess their integrity in the selection and appointment of cadres.
The education on the theme of honesty and integrity was carried out intensively, and the thematic education month activities of "Building the Good Reputation and Advocating Honesty and Integrity in Work".
COSCO SHIPPING has studied and implemented Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era and the spirit of the 19th CPC National Congress to carry out extensive publicity and study of the spirit throughout the system and organize special training courses for cadres. We have also published related articles and messages of all units learning, publicizing, and implementing the spirit of the 19th CPC National Congress in special columns set in China COSCO SHIPPING News, Party Building Essentials , the official website of the Group, and WeChat, setting off a craze for studying and implementing the spirit. We need to bring into full play the leading role of the Party leadership group and give top priority to the political building. We also need to maintain political integrity, think in terms of the big picture, follow the leadership core and keep in alignment with the central Party leadership. We must have full confidence in the path, theory, system, and culture of socialism with Chinese characteristics. We need to keep the core position of General Secretary Xi Jinping, the authority and centralized and unified leadership of the CPC Central Committee. We must closely follow the political orientation of the CPC Committee to focus on the implementation of the major principles, policies, strategic arrangements. We must chart our course, draft overall plans, and guarantee implementation to proactively carry out political, economic, and social responsibilities of central enterprises. The Party leadership group has implemented the spirit of the national Party building of state-owned enterprises, written the general requirements of Party building into the Group's articles of association, and clarified the legal status of the Party organization in corporate governance. It has also Implemented the main responsibility of governing the Party, strengthened the top-level design, and formulated the Primary-level Work Plan for Party Building 2017-2019 and Measures for the Implementation of the Party Building Responsibility System so as to ensure that intraparty political activities are carried out in earnest, work to implement key tasks, standardize the building of community-level Party branches, and constantly consolidate the basic work of Party building. Focusing on serving the central task of economic development as well as the overall interests of the country, we will make it regular practice and an institutionalized requirement for all Party members to gain a good command of the Party Constitution, Party regulations, and related major policy addresses and to meet Party standards so that the Party branch has fully played its vanguard and exemplary role for Party members in promoting reform and reorganization, improving quality, and increasing efficiency. We need to focus on reform and restructuring to promote cultural integration. Guided by the concept of "one team, one culture, one goal, and one dream" We issued the Outline for Core Value of Corporate Culture, actively publicizing the concept of corporate culture and putting corporate culture in place. We need to implement the work requirements of "one history, one record" set by the Ministry of Transport to carry out the compilation of the Group's history.
      Promoting risk management assessment
The "Implementation Plan of the Group on Corporate Legal Affairs and Risk Management Assessment" was formulated and implemented, which further strengthens the normalization of risk control assessment through the multi- dimensional, qualitativeand quantitative indicators
system.
Strengthening risk management system
The Regulations of the Group on Risk Assessment and Management was introduced to effectively guide the Group's headquarters and affiliates to carry out risk assessment and provide effective
support for major business decisions
The Group researched and released risk control systems and policies on trade operations such as the Administrative
Regulations of COSCO SHIPPING on Trade Business Risks, which lays a foundation for improving risk prevention and control
capabilities
Overall Planning of Institution and Mechanism
Institutional Perfection and Standardization
Establishing the Cadre Integrity File
Anti-corruption Publicity and Education
Party Building
  Cultivating risk management culture
 Integrity and Compliance
Strengthening publicity and guidance to enhanceawareness of risk control
Conducting systematic, multi-level riskmanagement training
COSCO Shipping strictly abides by laws and regulations, promotes zero tolerance anti-corruption policy, and incorporates the requirements concerning the promotion of employee integrity and compliance within the management and operation of the Group, with the intent of building a clean compliance-centric environment and workforce brimming with integrity.
14
15

Social Responsibility Management
COSCO SHIPPING actively supports the realization of the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and has integrated business operations with economic, social and environmental responsibilities at the beginning of the Group's founding, coordinated with the expectations of stakeholders and made continuous efforts to gain more trust from stakeholders and achieve sustainable development.
Social Responsibility Concept
We uphold the social responsibility concept of "Create value and bridge dream", undertake the mission of economic globalization, and continue to promote social responsibility management to pursue sustainable development.
As a central government-led enterprise having made history in China's shipping industry and having become the world's largest shipping enterprise, COSCO SHIPPING carries on the past and shoulders the future, keeping its original faith and being dedicated to building a "more scaled-up, more globalized, more competitive, and more valuable" business. Committed to providing smooth transport around the world, the group creates value for nations, society, customers, and employees, while still managing to bridge the most deeply held of dreams.
Communication and Participation of Stakeholders
COSCO SHIPPING maintains an honest and trustworthy relationship with stakeholders and continuously improves multi-leveled and multi-directional channels of communication with customers, employees, communities, partners and other stakeholders, maintaining mutual trust and commitment. We actively listen to the appeals of stakeholders, accept supervision, improve decision making according to feedback, and continuously promote social responsibility management.
 Case
Port and shipping cooperation unfolds a new era
On November 29, 2017, the COSCO SHIPPING and Ocean Alliance Port-shipping Exchange 2018 - "Jointly Create a New Era for Carriers and Ports Partnership by Building a Community with a Shared Future" sponsored by COSCO SHIPPING was held in Boao, Hainan. The representatives of 16 domestic and overseas ports and shipping enterprises have conducted in-depth discussions on the new situation, new models and new paths of port and shipping cooperation, reached a consensus on further strengthening cooperation between port and shipping and building a port and shipping community with a shared future, and jointly released the Jointly Create a New Era for Carriers and Ports Partnership by Building a Community with a Shared Future: Boao Declaration to promote the opening of a new era of port and shipping cooperation.
 To become an excellent leader in the world shipping industry
A world-class shipping and logistics enterprise must be built with international competitiveness, brand influence, and high reputation among customers; a complete global business chain must be formed; global resource allocation must be optimized; global trade must be upheld and served; commercial civilization must be spread; global connectivity must be promoted; convenience must be brought to all human life; and overall happiness must be created.
To become a provider of considerate services to global customers
Customer trust must be valued; play must be given to the corporate spirit; a global leading supply chain integrated service platform must be built; global customers with more advanced, higher-quality, and more efficient industry-wide chain services must be provided; and the maximization of customer value must be achieved.
To become the best supporter of employee growth
Employees' pursuit of self-value must be respected; a growth stage and broad development platform must be constructed for employees to do business and start their own undertakings; a solid material foundation and decent humanistic environment must be created; a good employer brand must be built; and the unification of "personal" and "entrepreneurial" dreams must be achieved.
16
To become a firm implementer of national strategies
An active response must be made to the Belt and Road Initiative; an important bridge connecting China with the world and a strategic channel of economic globalization must be built; and the Chinese dream must be strongly supported. There must be strict adherence to political responsibility; economic responsibility must be kept in mind; and value retention and an increase in state-owned assets must be ensured.
There must be strong compliance with the law, leading to growth and prosperity; long- lasting development must be realized; high-level results must be attained concerning social responsibility and the Global Compact; due care must be given to the global environment and poverty-stricken areas; participation in efforts toward international aid must be maintained; a "good corporate citizen" role must be achieved; and coordinated development of both the enterprise and society must be promoted.
To become an excellent practitioner of social responsibility
 Pursuing Sustainable Development
Opening UP
 Creating Value
Innovation Coordination
Bridging Dreams
Fulfilling the Mission of Economic Globalization
COSCO SHIPPING's social responsibility management model
Green Sharing
17

       Responsibility Focus I Piraeus Port
Greece's strategy to construct an important international logistics hub dovetails with China's Belt and Road Initiative. Both sides should focus efforts on building Piraeus Port into an important container transit port, a bridgehead of land and sea combined transport and an international logistics distribution center in the Mediterranean region. Such efforts will lay a solid foundation for the construction of the China- Europe Land-Sea Express Line and the completion of the Belt and Road Initiative, facilitating the increasingly deepened and consolidated cooperation between the two countries in such fields as infrastructure construction, energy, telecommunications, and the maritime sector and thereby bringing more benefits to the people within both countries.
We will continue to promote exchanges between Chinese civilization and other civilizations. Let us tell the stories of China well, and make our voices heard; let us promote mutual understanding between the people of our own country and those of other lands and create a better environment for achieving the Chinese Dream.
-Xi Jinping
The Greek word for Piraeus means "the place over the passage". The Piraeus Port on the coast of the Mediterranean Sea is the largest port in Greece and has been the southern gateway to Europe since ancient times. In 2008, in the context of the Greek debt crisis, COSCO SHIPPING signed a 35- year franchise agreement with Greece and officially operated port terminals #2 and #3 in 2010.
In the past 8 years, as the management of the port, COSCO SHIPPING has studied local laws, regulations and policies, fully considered the demands of local industries and urban development, focused on localized management, and fulfilled economic, social, and environmental responsibilities. With the hard work of COSCO SHIPPING, the port has gradually transformed from providing merely extensive primary shipping services to developing a complete logistics service chain. The Piraeus Port is the largest port in Greece and the second largest port in the Mediterranean, becoming a sparkling pearl in the construction of the "21st Century Maritime Silk Road". It creates new benefits and hopes for the Greek people, contributes to the optimization of Greek economic structure and stable economic development, and plays a pivotal role in the construction of the China-European Land- Sea Express line and implementation of the Belt and Road initiative. In the blueprint of the Belt and Road initiative, the construction of Piraeus Port is becoming a model for strategic cooperation between China and Greece and writing a new chapter in the history of Chinese and Greek civilizations.
"7 people" commitment
In 2008, the economic crisis hit Greece, as a result, a large number of people became unemployed and the public lost confidence in the future. At that time, the Piraeus Port handed over the operation rights of port terminals #2 and #3 to PCT. The locals believed that the Chinese came to take jobs from the Greeks. Therefore, they were dissatisfied with the investment of COSCO SHIPPING in Piraeus Port, and the dock workers began to launch large-scale strikes and the port operations faced crisis. In view of this, COSCO SHIPPING adhered to the oriental culture of high efficiency, staying pragmatic and transparent communication, and solemnly promised to the Greek workers that the Chinese side would only send seven management members, and all other jobs would be reserved for locals. Ever since PCT has made the commitment, all employees have been recruited locally in Greece except for seven senior executives, thus PCT has been recognized and supported by the local government and people.
Over the past eight years since its establishment in Piraeus Port, COSCO SHIPPING has directly provided and created more than 2,600 jobs and indirectly provided and created more than 8,000 jobs. According to the research and forecast of the well-known Greek think tank, Research Institute of Economics and Industry, by 2025, the Piraeus Port project will increase 470 million euros of financial revenue for Greece, create 31,000 jobs, and raise the Grecian GDP by 0.8%. According to the Greek National Bank, the value of the national logistics industry is expected to increase from 400 million euros in 2015 to 2.5 billion euros in 2025, in which the Piraeus Port project will play an important role.
The same pair of chopsticks
Due to the special location of the terminal, it is difficult to find a place to eat and the staff can only bring their own lunch, which is very inconvenient. In response to this problem, the PCT management decided to provide free lunches in the company and set up a lunch management organization by employees. Although the PCT staff canteen is aimed at Greek employees, there are Chinese dishes every week, which satisfies and enriches the taste of Greeks as world foodies. In addition, at Christmas every year, PCT invites children under 14 and their parents to get together in the company, with gifts prepared. Each year, four model Greek employees are selected and rewarded with a one-week trip to China. If employees encounter financial difficulties, they can get advance of wages.
Driven by such core values as "people-oriented", "harmony, mutual benefit, and common development", COSCO SHIPPING has an in-depth understanding of local customs and practices of Piraeus Port and cares for the Greek employees with the fraternity of the Chinese nation, thus forming a working atmosphere of mutual respect, solidarity and friendship between the Greek and Chinese cadres and employees, which facilitates the inheritance and integration of the long history and culture of the two ancient civilizations.
     SDGs
  体面工作和 经济增长
        18
19

    Greece and China are two ancient civilizations. Under the new situation, both sides should work hard to promote pragmatic cooperation in fields of economy, investment, finance, energy, agriculture, new technologies, etc., and to promote the sound development of the Piraeus Port project. Greece is very happy to cooperate in the Belt and Road initiative, and believes that the initiative is farsighted and significant and conducive to the interconnection of economy, trade, energy, transport and network in
Piraeus Port is an important stop of the "21st Century Maritime Silk Road" and is the intersection of the maritime section and the railway section of China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line. With a unique and important position in Europe, it is the gateway to the Mediterranean Sea and can effectively promote the maritime prosperity between China and the Mediterranean, which is in line with the development strategy of COSCO SHIPPING.
COSCO SHIPPING has developed many job opportunities for us and given us a stable and reliable working environment, and we don't have to worry about tomorrow here. It has also formed a positive "economic climate" in Piraeus Port. I believe COSCO SHIPPING will bring prosperity to the port and create more jobs for Greece.
- PCT Security Department Aris Fotopoulos
Eurasia. - Greek Prime Minister Tsipras
Since 2009, COSCO SHIPPING has been making high-quality investment in Piraeus Port. After years of efforts, COSCO SHIPPING has successfully enhanced the competitiveness and importance of Piraeus Port in the international shipping market, which plays a positive role in promoting the economic development of Greece. By far, the Piraeus Port terminal has become a large and technologically advanced modern container terminal in Greece. It is the terminal with the fastest growing throughput among the world's top 100 container terminals for two consecutive years and is also an important hub port for many international container liner companies in the eastern Mediterranean.
- Chairman of China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited Xu Lirong
20
 680,000
TEU at the beginning of the takeover
The overall profit of Piraeus Port
4.15million
TEU in 2017
93rd
At the beginning of the merger
The container throughput
  The global ranking
 36rd
in 2017
  3.12 million euros
47million euros
in 2017
The direct economic contribution to the local area
Scan to watch the video
more than 2,600
Indirect job creation
more than 8,000
700 million euros
 Direct job creation
    Topics in Focus ("Jiaodianfangtan") The Faraway Home The Faraway Home Piraeus Port The Belt and Road - COSCO Holdings The Belt and Road - New Look of
Piraeus Port Piraeus Port
21

       Responsibility Focus II
Concentrating Efforts on Poverty Alleviation
Demonstration site of new rural construction of Jiarizha in Zituo Town constructed with the aid of COSCO SHIPPING
We should combine poverty alleviation with establishing determination and promoting education, fully mobilize the enthusiasm and initiative of the low-income, and guide them to establish the subject consciousness, uphold the spirit of self-reliance, stimulate their vigor and determination to throw off poverty and change the destiny with their own efforts.
Nursing home aided by COSCO SHIPPING
Promoting Poverty Alleviation
Management
         SDGs
-Xi Jinping
Water supply plant built with the aid of COSCO SHIPPING
Poverty alleviation is the responsibility of central enterprises. In active response to the national call and to achieve targeted poverty alleviation, COSCO SHIPPING carries out poverty reduction with manpower, material resources and financial resources from multiple dimensions and in a comprehensive way. Extensive work has been carried out in education, public facilities, new rural construction, medical and health care, etc., which has contributed to the steady development of local economy and society and accelerated the realization of a prosperous society.
Residential building constructed with the aid of COSCO SHIPPING
System construction
Fund management
Cadre management
COSCO SHIPPING has improved the poverty alleviation system, optimized fund management, cultivated poverty alleviation teams, and systematically strengthened management of poverty alleviation to ensure efficient and orderly progress of poverty alleviation projects.
The 2017 plan on Tibet poverty alleviation funds and projects was prepared, the Administrative Regulations of COSCO SHIPPING on Targeted Support was formulated, and the Guiding Opinions of the Party Committee Discipline Inspection Group of COSCO SHIPPING on Further Strengthening the Supervision and Inspection of Poverty Alleviation (Aid for Tibet) Funds and Projects was issued, which clarify functions and duties, give priority to efficiency, ensure legal compliance and lay a solid institutional foundation for poverty alleviation and development.
The Administrative Measures for the Group's External Donations was issued, the "2017- 2020 Aid for Tibet Poverty Alleviation Fund Plan", the "2017-2020 Aid for Tibet Poverty Alleviation Fund Raising Plan", the "2017 Fund Plan on Counterpart Support for Lhorong County Projects" and other fund plans were approved and the Group coordinated with the counterpart support areas to clarify matching funds and policy support for related projects.
Excellent cadres were selected from the system to shift work of five temporary cadres in Yongde County, Anhua County and Yuanling County respectively. Assessment on the previous batch of cadres was conducted and training and pre-employment talks were held for the incoming cadres, ensuring the cadres to be fully engaged in poverty alleviation and pull together with local cadres to solve practical difficulties.
                    22
23

   2017 Voyage • Homeland "Internet + Poverty Alleviation" E-commerce Poverty Alleviation Training Course was held in Chengdu |
Since 2002, COSCO SHIPPING has stayed true to its mission and kept in mind the source of benefits, and undertaken affairs of Tibet's Lhorong County as its own. The Group has enhanced the counterpart assistance, broadened the scope of assistance and improved the aid mechanism to endeavor to accelerate the development of Tibet and enhance the well- being of the people.
COSCO SHIPPING believes that all the efforts of counterpart assistance will eventually reach the local people. People's livelihood is the top priority of COSCO SHIPPING's aid to Tibet. In order to become familiar with the customs and practices of Tibet and better understand local people's livelihood needs, the Tibet Aid Working Group of COSCO SHIPPING proactively integrated into the work and life of people in Lhorong County.
To ensure the effectiveness of the Tibet aid projects, the Tibet Aid Working Group conducted in-depth research to understand the local conditions. They traveled through four towns and seven townships of Lhorong County as well as some villages to get a comprehensive picture of the production and living conditions of farmers and herdsmen, infrastructure construction in agricultural and pastoral areas, education and health undertakings, and the primary-level Party building and gain the first-hand information, which has laid a solid foundation for the rational planning of Tibet aid projects.
After learning and researching with multiple parties, the Tibet Aid Working Group made elaborate organizing and planning to promote the smooth implementation of aid projects one by one. During the 16 years of aiding Tibet, COSCO SHIPPING has promoted the development of education, and the "COSCO SHIPPING - Science and Education Cultural Center" has become the landmark of Lhorong County, and the "COSCO SHIPPING
- Gesangmeiduo" fund provides education resources to low-income children. To improve the production and living conditions of farmers and herdsmen, the "COSCO SHIPPING – County Unpowered Water Supply" has provided drinking water for thousands of people. And the "COSCO SHIPPING - Kangsha New Village" has created a model for small towns and beautiful villages. To promote the development of medical and health care, the "COSCO SHIPPING - Ganglameiduo" medical relief fund has enabled low-income households to receive medical treatment, and the "COSCO SHIPPING - Hospital Informationized Management System" has promoted the successful establishment of the first county-level secondary hospital in Changdu City...
The assistance of COSCO SHIPPING has played a role in the leap-forward economic and social development and lasting peace and order of Lhorong County.
On December 28, 2016, the Lhasa-Ningbo "Tibet" container train, which was planned by COSCO SHIPPING, officially launched. Carrying 70 containers and 1,890 tons of Zhuomaquan natural drinking water, it ran 4,500 kilometers through Tibet, Qinghai, Gansu, Shaanxi, Henan, Anhui, and Zhejiang and reached the destination after 6 days and opened the door for Tibet to fully integrate into the implementation of the national Belt and Road initiative and "South Asia Land Corridor". Lhorong County, COSCO SHIPPING's newly added counterpart support object - Riwoqê County and even the entire Tibet Autonomous Region are expected to achieve leap- forward development.
Primary school stadium in Lhorong County aided by COSCO SHIPPING |
Actions of Poverty Alleviation
In the poverty alleviation, COSCO SHIPPING adheres to classified policies based on groups and local areas as well as the causes and types of poverty. Field surveys are carried out to understand local characteristics, and poverty alleviation resources in industries, education, employment, infrastructure, etc. are integrated and optimized to help economic and social development in poverty-stricken areas.
Developing Industry
Yuanling, Hunan: With ecological leisure tourism as the leading force, the gradual development of honey, vegetables, tea, kiwi and other industries are vigorously promoted; in the form of "agritourism cooperatives + farmer households", a model of poverty alleviation through tourism that can be replicated is formed.
Anhua, Hunan: Support Anhua black tea industry as the key point to adjust and improve the economic structure, expand employment and promote the poverty-stricken people to get rid of poverty and become rich.
Lincang, Yunnan: Mainly investing in and cooperating with industries such as leisure tourism, health, biomedicine and specialty agricultural products.
Improving Basic Education Level
Yongde, Yunnan: Implementing basic education assistance projects to improve the quality of education and teaching.
Anhua, Hunan: Promoting the school infrastructure construction in Anhua, providing assistance to poor students, and mobilizing social resources to aid students in need together.
Other: Riwoqê County, Lhorong County and Yuanling have scholarship and learning programs.
Providing Employment Training
Yongde, Yunnan: Establishing a partnership with specialized seafarer training institutions on the employment training of sailing and marine engine professionals to implement "order-based" professional training.
Yongde, Yunnan, and Anhua and Yuanling, Hunan: In cooperation with social organizations, through the establishment of a special training camp on traditional Chinese medicine, a group of traditional Chinese medicine personnel with professional excellence and moral integrity are cultivated.
Riwoqê, Tibet: Launching the "Voyage·Homeland" employee training program.
24
Promoting Infrastructure Construction
Yuanling, Hunan: Renovating public facilities; implementing ecological resettlement projects; safe drinking water project; strengthening the development of senior assistance projects.
Anhua, Hunan: River bank reinforcement and renovation, construction of safe drinking water projects.
Yongde, Yunnan: Construction of clinic, school, village square, village - level highway.
Riwoqê and Lhorong, Tibet: Relocation project for poverty alleviation.
New shelter bridge - COSCO Happy Bridge
Poverty Alleviation Story - "Sixteen years in Tibet"
 Combined transport helps the snowy plateau to pursue dreams under the Belt and Road"initiative, and the "Tibet" container train sets off for Ningbo
25
 Case
COSCO SHIPPING continues to promote the student aidactivitythemed"COSCOSHIPPING's Wishes"
Organizations of the Youth League at all levels of COSCO SHIPPING have carried out public welfare activities for young volunteers so that young employees can give back to society. COSCO SHIPPING has improved the long-term mechanism of organizing units and individuals to provide aid for students on a one-to-one basis. From September 1, 2017, to August 31, 2020, it launched a new round of student aid activities themed "COSCO SHIPPING's Wishes" in Yongde County, Yunnan Province, to expand the scale of aid to needy students. After the Group issued the Notice on the Payment Arrangement for Student Aid Activity Themed "COSCO SHIPPING's Wishes", young employees have actively responded to and enthusiastically participated in the student aid activities. When the list of the fifth batch of 200 needy students provided by the Youth League Committee of Yongde County was published, all these students were provided with one-to-one aid in a few days. We even received calls from some good-hearted people outside the Group's system asking if they could participate in the aid activity. Throughout the entire system, we have supported 324 needy students in Yongde County with 537,800 yuan collected from all units and individuals. COSCO SHIPPING leaders, leaders of all units, retired cadres, Party branches, and Youth League branches have also joined the team of helping these students in their study, fostering healthy social conducts for the entire system to have the courage to fulfill its responsibilities, serve the society and send its love.

 2.5 million RMB
Donation from COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation to the 5 counties
12.31 million RMB
Support funds from the Group's subordinate units
398
24 million RMB
COSCO SHIPPING's total investment in support of 5 counties under targeted poverty alleviation
93
14
Trainings organized for locals
15.926 million RMB
Local agricultural products procurement
In 2017
38.997million RMB
The Group's total support funds
On the whole
"To ordain conscience for Heaven and Earth, to secure life and fortune for the people, to establish peace for all future generations", this is the famous saying of Zhang Zai, a renowned Neo-Confucianist of Northern Song Dynasty and leader of Neo-Confucianism in Guanzhong. To apply it in poverty alleviation, it can be comprehended as rebuilding the development concept for poverty- stricken areas, establishing life goals for people living in poverty, and expanding the thinking and helping the transformation for economic development in targeted poverty alleviation area."
- Chairman, Secretary of Party Committee of China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited Xu Lirong
"Doing good deeds is the social responsibility of a central enterprise. As a member of a state- owned enterprise and a member of the PRC, we will not hesitate to respond to the call of the Party Central Committee and fulfill social responsibilities."
- Participant in poverty alleviation in Yongde County Liu Qingqing (COSCO SHIPPING Lines)
"As a participant of the economic and social development and long- term stability of Lhorong County, I've seen earth-shaking changes take place in the county since the support of COSCO SHIPPING in 2002. Over the past 16 years, the assistance of COSCO SHIPPING has played a leveraging role in the rapid economic and social development and lasting peace and order of Lhorong County, with a Tibet aiding road with COSCO SHIPPING characteristics and features of Lhorong County paved."
- Former deputy county magistrate of the Lhorong County People's Government Gasongzhaxi
Data on poverty alleviation
Lhorong County, Tibet
Yongde County, Yunnan Province
Since the establishment of the pairing assistance relationship with Yongde County in 2006, the Group has accumulatively invested more than 48.07 million yuan to help a total of 584 villager groups in 55 administrative villages of 10 townships, benefiting 28,700 households and 113,324 people.
Anhua County and Yuanling County, Hunan Province
Since participating in poverty alleviation of Anhua County and Yuanling County in Hunan Province in 2010, the Group has sent 14 poverty alleviation cadres and provided a total of more than 40 million yuan poverty alleviation funds. In addition, COSCO SHIPPING
Over the past 16 years, COSCO SHIPPING has selected 17 cadres in 9 batches to go
to Lhorong County for assistance, investing 169 million yuan to aid Tibet, implementing more than 100 support projects, and benefiting over 50,000 people.
Riwoqê County, Tibet
Number of support cadres: 1
Invested funds:6.5million
Implemented projects:3
Beneficiary population: approximately 50,000
26
27
Cadres, professional and technical personnel, and laborers trained
9,005
Total number of people living in poverty COSCO SHIPPING aided
"Longqi Village is a reservoir migrant village and has expected for roads for more than 20 years. Now, with the help of COSCO SHIPPING, the roads are opened, and we feel a relief. Vehicles can come in, and the timber and mountain goods can be transported out smoothly, and our green hills will truly become "wealth". Thanks to the good policies of the Party and the state, and thanks to COSCO SHIPPING for its strong support."
- Director of the Village Committee of Longqi Village, Malu Town Liu Ping'an
Projects implemented
Charity Foundation
provided more than 12 million yuan of public welfare funds.

  INNOVATION
Stimulating the Momentum for Continuous Expansion
Innovation is the inexhaustible power for enterprise development. The three starting points for COSCO SHIPPING to properly carry out all work during the "13th Five-Year Plan" period are ramping up, creating profit, and innovating, which are also the important engine for the Group to devote to the construction of "shipping power" and implementing the Belt and Road initiative and to promote the enterprise to grow bigger and stronger. COSCO SHIPPING has attached great importance to the "mass entrepreneurship and innovation", promoting scientific and technological innovation, innovative employee training, business model innovation, fostering new models, and creating a new starting point for innovation and benefit-making.
  In today's world, the trend of change and innovation is surging forward. Chinese ancestors realized as early as 2,500 years ago that, 'If it is beneficial to the people, it is not necessary to follow the ancient system; if it is suitable for the actual situation, it is not necessary to follow the old customs '. Change and innovation are the fundamental driving force for the development of human society. Those who reject change and innovation will fall behind the times and be eliminated by history.
-Xi Jinping
SDGs
   28
29

 Technological Innovation
COSCO SHIPPING focuses on the frontier of technology, strives to master various key technologies, enhances its independent R&D ability, and promotes the Group's development towards the goal of "green, intelligent, and high-end".
Case
"Hope No.6" leaves for the UK with "Xin Guang Hua" carrier, and China's marine engineering equipment manufacturing develops towards the high end
On February 25, 2017, "Hope No.6", the first floating production storage and offloading (FPSO) built for British DANA PETROLEUM Company by Nantong COSCO SHIPYARD Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry under COSCO SHIPPING, officially set sail for the United Kingdom. The "Xin Guang Hua" carrier, which is responsible for transporting "Hope No.6", is currently China's largest and the world's second largest semi-submerged ship operated by COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers. It is equipped with the world-leading DP2 dynamic positioning system and is the most advanced 100,000- ton large semi-submerged ship.
The "Hope No.6" cylindrical FPSO is the first one-stop turnkey project (EPC) undertaken by China's marine engineering equipment manufacturing enterprise which covers the design, procurement, construction, commissioning and some offshore installation and transportation. The design and construction has opened up a precedent for China's marine engineering equipment manufacturing industry in the FPSO turnkey project, promoted the development of China's marine engineering equipment manufacturing technology and industrialization,
   933.55 million RMB
Science and technology input in 2017
3.73%
Increased by
  CIN Navigation Technology First Prize
COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers Co., Ltd.
Development of the new generation of 28,000DWT heavy-lift multi-purpose ship
CIN Navigation Technology Second Prize
Shanghai COSCO SHIPYARD
Large multi-point mooring FPSO design and construction technology
CIN Navigation Technology Third Prize
Shanghai Ship and Shipping Research Institute
Research and application of ship main power monitoring system
Technological innovation results
On July 11, 2017, Dalian COSCO Shipyard's first Subsea Support Vessel (SSV) completed a trial voyage
On July 9, 2017, China Shipping Industry Co., Ltd. (Shanghai Changxing), Shanghai COSCO SHIPYARD, and COSCO (Qidong) Shipyard Co., Ltd. promoted the P70 FPSO offshore project to achieve a major goal of closing ship bow, stern and undocking
and achieved a breakthrough in the use of China-made FPSO in the North Sea by the UK, where sea conditions are complex and demanding. A number of technological innovations have filled the blank of domestic marine industry and reached the world's leading level, which marks a significant leap of China's marine engineering equipment manufacturing from the design and construction of middle-end marine engineering products to high-end products, with a Chinese brand of marine engineering equipment manufacturing created.
     Informational Note
"Hope No.6" sails for the UK with "Xin Guang Hua" carrier
FPSO stands for Floating Production Storage and Offloading, which is offshore oil / gas plants integrating production, storage and unloading of oil, with the characteristics of large size, difficult to design and construct and high-level automation.
 Scan to watch the video
              30
31
Dalian COSCO SHIPYARD builds FPSO excellent refitting engineering based on modular projects
Too capricious! "Hope No.6" floods the screen
CCTV Xinwen Lianbo
FPSO "Hope No.6" starts the honeymoon trip with "Xin Guang Hua"
Xinwen Lianbo - Like China China Force • "Hope No.6" sails to the UK

32
33
Nantong COSCO KHI Ship Engineering Co., Ltd.
Cultivation of Innovative Staff
Achievements are made with intelligence, and business is expanded by staff. COSCO SHIPPING provides good environment for the development of science and technology employees, discovers staff in innovative practices, cultivates teams through innovative activities, and pools human resources in innovative undertakings, so as to provide continuous intellectual support for the Group's innovation development.
 Case
Nantong COSCO KHI Ship Engineering Co., Ltd. (NACKS) is dedicated to creating intelligent workshops
In recent years, NACKS has been committed to the transformation and upgrading of production modes, and has taken the lead in trials in the domestic shipping industry. The company constantly promotes the application of digital design and manufacturing technologies, effectively integrates various core systems, and starts with automated production lines and assembly lines to gradually transit to intelligent production lines and workshops. At present, 29 automated and intelligent production lines have been put into production and 2 intelligent workshops have been initially established, undertaking many national, provincial and municipal scientific research projects.
The company has initially realized the transformation from labor-intensive to technology and information-intensive enterprise, and promoted the quality and efficiency of enterprise development. In 2017, the company's "ship manufacturing with intelligent workshop" project was shortlisted for "China's Top 10 Progresses of Science and Technology in intelligent Manufacturing". The demonstration experience of intelligent shipyard construction is a beneficial trial for Chinese ship industry in exploring the construction of intelligent shipyards and improving the level and capability of ship manufacturing. It also has good exemplary effects in the improvement of labor productivity, ecological environment and living conditions, as well as the industry's innovation ability and competitiveness.
     research institutes have explored to
Focus on industry prospects and cutting-edge technology
committee is set up to connect research with
cooperate to estab- lish research center
Establish a research center
application based on shipowners'needs, and
Ship companies, research insti- tutes and heavy industries are
organized to connect with foreign manufacturers and
 COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry and
senior classification societies. The Group technical expert
 and enhance basic design and R&D ability of ship
to discuss the industry prospects and the development trend of cutting-edge technol- ogy.
types.
Build a team to lead shipping technology
 The Group's technical advantages are brought into play, selecting 24 senior experts in the technical field of ship steering, etc. and building a leading team in shipping technology.
Cultivation of innovative staff

 Innovation of Business Models
With the further promotion of the Belt and Road initiative, the logistics demands of domestic and overseas sales by enterprises has gradually increased. Keeping close with the market needs, COSCO SHIPPING innovates traditional shipping operation models, selects multiple routes to connect transport of sea and land, and transforms to develop full supply chain logistics. We provide customers with end- to-end, diversified and one-stop multimodal transport logistics services and more cost-effective solutions with better service quality and continuously enhance the Group's competitiveness to achieve a mutually beneficial situation with customers.
 Case
Innovative layout of China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line opens the third trade channel between China and Europe
 On December 28, 2017, OceanRail Logistics S.A completed industrial and commercial registration in Greece, which marks the official establishment of China-Europe land-sea express line company of COSCO SHIPPING. The China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line is a regional rail and sea intermodal brand built by COSCO SHIPPING with great efforts, with Piraeus Port as the hub and in cooperation with the Austrian National Railway Company and DB Schenker Rail of Germany. The business scope covers 16 countries including Greece, Macedonia and Serbia, and more than 32 million people.
The China-Europe sea-land express line covers a wide area and realizes
the sea and rail combined transport. After the sea container arrives
at Piraeus Port of Greece, it can reach central and eastern European
countries such as the Czech Republic and Poland by train through
the China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line. Through this route, the
total transport time of goods from the Far East to Central Europe is
shortened by 7 to 10 days compared with other traditional paths, which
speeds up the delivery of goods and saves considerable transportation
time and costs for customers. In order to further build the "China-
Europe Land-Sea Express Line" with Piraeus Port of Greece as the
hub, since 2017, COSCO SHIPPING has opened the China-Europe
Express Route directly to Piraeus Port of Greece on the China-European
container lines. More than 30 container ships of 7,000 to 13,000 TEU regularly travel between the Far East and the Mediterranean Sea, providing transportation services from Chinese cities such as Tianjin, Dalian, Qingdao, Shanghai, and Ningbo to Piraeus Port of Greece and connect with the China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line with the fastest shipping schedule.
With Piraeus Port as the hub and based on a strong network of shipping lines, COSCO SHIPPING innovates its business model, continuously strengthens cooperation with the railway company, and further advances the construction of China-Europe Land- Sea Express Line. It has won more business opportunities for the Group and provided customers with more choices to save cost and transportation time. The construction and development of China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line has greatly promoted the development of the "21st Century Maritime Silk Road" and countries along it and provided stronger support for the national strategy.
 China-Europe Train
 The China-Europe sea-land express line
 Case
COSCO SHIPPING cooperates with China Railway Engineering Corporation to deepen the development of international combined transport and rail-water transport
In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING and CHINA RAILWAY signed a strategic cooperation agreement to promote the development of international combined transport and rail-water transport. The two sides has strengthened the cooperation to gather the shipping and railway resources, give play to their respective main business advantages and enhance synergies. This is conducive to expanding the scale of sea and rail transport and business operations, helps to improve logistics efficiency, reduce logistics costs and creates a new logistics ecosystem, and can join forces to serve and promote the implementation of the Belt and Road initiative to form a seamless connection between "sea" and "land".
  Case
COSCO SHIPPING launched LCL e-commerce service to make LCL logistics simpler
In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING adapted to the booming trend of e-commerce and new retail business, vigorously promoted marketing innovation, and joined forces with Alibaba to launch LCL e-commerce services and promote the successful launch of COSCO SHIPPING Lines' LCL services on the "Alibaba Logistics Trade Platform".
Through the platform, the Group can connect with all large and medium-sized foreign trade enterprises registered on the Alibaba website. When the registered enterprise has the LCL logistics demand, it can directly log in to the OneTouch platform to obtain relevant logistics information of COSCO SHIPPING container LCL prices and sailing schedule, and make a one-click order online to complete all the logistics operations.
The launch of COSCO SHIPPING Lines' LCL services on the "Alibaba Logistics Trade Platform" is to expand COSCO SHIPPING Lines' LCL business by virtue of the high market visibility of e-commerce platform, which is of great strategic significance for the brand publicity and business development of COSCO SHIPPING Lines' ship-owners' LCL. It also helps the company to improve customer service capabilities and provide more convenient logistics services for foreign trade enterprises.
 34 35
 南通中远海运川崎

  COORDINATION
Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  Coordination is not only a means but also the goal of development. It is the criterion and yardstick for evaluating development, and the unification of the two-point and key- point theory, balanced and unbalanced development, and shortcomings and potentials.
-Xi Jinping
Coordinated development is an effective guarantee to make development more comprehensive and promote the all-round progress of the cause. Facing its transformation and development, the upgrading of customer service capacity, and the new normal of national economic development, COSCO SHIPPING has adopted a holistic approach to the coordinated development among the "6+1" industrial clusters and worked hard to promote the simultaneous development of regions so that the Group and the society can achieve fairer sustainable development of better quality.
SDGs
    36
37

Consolidating Safety
COSCO SHIPPING gives top priority to safety in all work, and adheres to the safety concept of "implementing high-standard management, building high-standard ships, and staffing high-standard crews". The Group conscientiously implements the safety production policy of "safety first, prevention first, comprehensive management", further promotes the construction of safety management system, and implements the responsibility system for production safety at all levels, and strengthens the building of security teams to ensure safe production.
Strengthening monitoring of key ships
Attaching importance to tracking and monitoring liquefied chemical carriers, large ships, ships in the north and south poles, and special cargo ships.
Strengthening tracking of disastrous weather
Holding meetings on small ship's defense against typhoon; clarifying the guidelines for"defense against typhoon"; improving emergency measures.
Strengthening monitoring
Adequately fulfilling duties during national statutory holidays and major events.
Strengthening anti-piracy work
Paying attention to piracy activities in global waters; organizing symposiums on anti-piracy; timely adjusting the anti-piracy work requirements; enhancing inspections and urging rectification.
COSCO Shipping attaches great importance to and continuously strengthens the construction of the safety team, and improves the cohesiveness and the efficiency and quality of safety work. The Group organizes various special sessions such as meetings to seek for advices and suggestions. All units have strengthened coordination in ship repairing, ship spare parts, lubricant materials management, wastewater treatment, etc. All overseas companies continue to serve the main fleet of the Group by providing shore-based support in ship safety inspection, ship emergency response and coordination, and other aspects, to facilitate the safety pre-inspection and joint inspection, and reduce the risk of ship detention.
Scan to watch the video
           Developing the safety production plan
The 13th Five-Year Plan for Safe Production of COSCO SHIPPING is formulated to specify the guiding ideology, principles and objectives
of the Group's safety work during the "13th Five-Year Plan" period.
Improving the safety supervision system
Seven institutions including the Supervisory Measures for Safety Production , the Regulations on Safety Production Responsibilities , the Regulations on Safety Production Accountability,
andtheRegulations on Overseas Company Safety Management have been
formulated.
Safety management system construction
Standardizing subcontractor safety management
Documents such as the Guiding Opinions for Safety Management of Subcontractors were formulated to standardize relevant work and
serve as a supplement to the safety system.
                    Measures for prevention and control of safety risks
Major 0accidents 578.22 million RMB
In 2017, the investment in safety production
100%
The anti-piracy success rate
       38
39
100%
The anti-typhoon success rate
Shipping log on Maritime Silk Road Ensuring safe navigation with uninterrupted sea drills
Shipping log on Maritime Silk Road Driving into the Gulf of Aden, all the crew is engaged in anti-piracy exercises

Providing Quality
Harmonious Supply Chains
Customer Services
After being implemented in
COSCO SHIPPING not only attaches importance to the impact of its operations on society and the environment, but also promotes the sustainable development of suppliers and actively promotes supplier responsibility management. The supplier access, selection, assessment, and termination mechanisms are strictly regulated. Suppliers are required to carry out businesses in compliance with applicable laws and regulations, and specific requirements concerning safety, environmental protection, and health are put forward for suppliers, so as to effectively monitor and control risks, urge suppliers to constantly enhance their social responsibility management awareness and responsibility performing capability, and maintain the overall health of the supply chain ecosystem.
In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING developed the work plan and timetable for 14 rules and regulations, and formulated the management rules for the Group procurement review experts in accordance with relevant requirements of the Group supplier management measures. In addition, COSCO SHIPPING also specially organized the work meeting on the improvement and self-evaluation of procurement management and invited relevant responsible members of the SASAC for special guidance, so as to promote procurement management. COSCO SHIPPING Holdings have established the supplier qualification review mechanism, and scored suppliers according to their comprehensive performance in reputation and service quality. The suppliers are grouped into A, B, C, D, and E levels based on their scores. Priority is given to high-rated suppliers while E-level suppliers are not involved.
 COSCO SHIPPING adheres to a "customer-centric" principle, deepening and strengthening communication with customers, paying attention to customers' diversified needs and market changes and innovating products and service types to continuously improve its customer service capabilities, improve the construction of customer service system and achieve a mutually beneficial situation for the Group's business development and customer value.
COSCO SHIPPING has also established a customer feedback system to respond promptly to and earnestly handle customer feedbacks and opinions, improve service quality in a targeted manner, and maintain customer satisfaction. In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Energy received 15 customer commendatory letters, and the complaint handling rate and customer satisfaction were both 100%. 11 customer satisfaction questionnaires were handed out by COSCO SHIPPING Ports with 7 copies collected in total, all of which got full marks.
domestic ports, nine service standards
Promoting the construction
are promoted overseas
Improving the virtual customer service center mechanism in China
Enriching functions of public service platform
Continuing to promote the transfer of overseas operations
of global standardized
customer service process
 Case
COSCO SHIPPING Development promotes suppliers to assume responsibilities
COSCO SHIPPING Development has continuously improved the supplier management system. The Management and Audit of Florens Subcontractors and Accessories Dealers and other regulations are formulated to put forward clear anti-pollution requirements for suppliers, supervise suppliers to reduce environmental pollution in the production process, and work with suppliers to reduce negative impacts of the industrial chain on the environment.
 Measures of COSCO SHIPPING Lines to improve customer service capability
 Case
Innovating the service mode, with new breakthrough in cross-strait transport of special goods
Through customizing personalized shipping schemes, Xiamen COSCO SHIPPING broke the traditional operation mode of cross- strait shipping route passing through the surrounding ports, and split the 14,000 m3 ultra-high, ultra-wide and super-heavy large production line equipment from Taichung to Ji'an, Jiangxi for packing and shipping in batches, thus the transportation time was shortened from 15 days to less than 3 days, realizing the "the price of sea freight, the efficiency of air transport" and showing a new direction for the development of the cross-strait special cargo transportation market.
   Case
Vehicle logistics service helps Chinese auto brands go global
In order to provide high-quality, professional, convenient, and efficient services, COSCO SHIPPING Lines has innovated and upgraded the auto transport mode to the "container + special car stand". Such vehicle logistics service, known as the fourth model, is safe, reliable, convenient, and efficient, and will effectively boost China's manufacturing to go global and create a new pattern of China's vehicle export transportation.
 40
41

Boosting Industry Prosperity
The sustainable and healthy development of the industry affects every company in the industry chain. With its own advantages, COSCO SHIPPING actively carries out industry communication and cooperation, engages in the formulation of industry standards and cultivates high-end professional industry staff to boost the shipping industry to flourish.
Industry Exchanges and Cooperation
COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes the industry information communication, shares development experience with industry partners and strengthens exchanges and cooperation. In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING successively cooperated with China Ship-owners' Association and China Association of Port-of-Entry, etc. to complete the preparation, organization, and coordination of important conferences, and assisted in the re-entry of multiple associations including Shanghai International Shipping Center Development & Promotion Organization, Zhenghe Research Association, and China Association of Trade in Services, as well as recommendation for personnel change.
Construction of Industry Standards
COSCO SHIPPING closely follows the development trend and changes of the industry and participates in the formulation of industry technical standards to enhance the international rights for the shipping industry. COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry is carrying out the project, Research on Quality Control Standards for Ship Repairs, and with the "intelligent ship" project as the starting point, actively connected with the Lloyd's Register of Shipping to exchange cutting-edge navigation technology, and participated in the formulation of international normative standards. Qingdao Ocean Shipping Mariners College researched and developed China's industry standards - the Operating Requirements for Marine Engine Simulator , which has filled China's blank in the use standards for marine simulators, met the requirements of the STCW Convention on simulator training and evaluation and given full play to the standardization and promotion role of "standards" in simulator teaching and assessment.
Cultivation of Industry Staff
The ever-changing economic and social development and economic globalization keeps requiring for professional and international Chinese high-end shipping staff. COSCO SHIPPING has attached great importance to the training of staff for the shipping industry and continuously improves the quality of personnel training based on the actual needs of the shipping market, so as to bring vitality to the development and prosperity of China's shipping industry.
New advancement in scientific R&D capabilities
Strengthening scientific research services and project set-up guidance;
 Case
We sponsored the Subforum "The Future of Logistics" of Boao Forum for Asia (BFA) to promote the development of logistics industry
Since the establishment of BFA, COSCO SHIPPING has undertaken the responsibility of serving the general diplomacy of China and shouldered the important mission of constructing and providing service guarantee for the BFA annual conference. In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING sponsored the annual conference subforum "The Future of Logistics" for the first time. In the subforum, the global logistics supply chain and upstream and downstream business representatives and stakeholders had extensive and in-depth discussions of the changing logistics industry, and reached a consensus on promoting global economic and trade prosperity and development.
   building a platform for sci-tech innovation transformation;
The practical teaching level continues to improve
 properly carrying out project acceptance and achievements
Qingdao Ocean Shipping Mariners College strengthens cultivation of industry employee
Promoting teaching reform; strengthening professional and curriculum construction; reinforcing the building of teaching faculty; enhancing international exchanges and cooperation.
 42
43
Subforum "The Future of Logistics" of Boao Forum for Asia Annual Conference 2018
reporting for awards
  New breakthroughs in on- the-job training
Exploring the development and innovation of training projects; researching and designing training programs; exploring new ways of training management.

Promoting Regional Development
COSCO SHIPPING has actively responded to and served regional development strategies such as the development of the Yangtze River Economic Belt, the coordinated development of Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei, and accelerated the flow of production factors by virtue of the implementation of the Belt and Road initiative, contributing to the coordinated development of China and the world.
The story between COSCO SHIPPING and Hong Kong
Hong Kong Ocean Shipping Company
established by the former Ministry of Business scale expanded,
COSCO SHIPPING has actively responded to the national regional coordinated development strategy, and promoted the export and circulation of local products through the development of shipping and other industries, driven regional economic and social development, and assisted the country in coordinating and optimizing regional development.
 Case
Trains of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau
Due to being far away from China urban clusters, the cold and oxygen deficit conditions and long-distance transportation, the exchange of commodities with Tibet was relatively small. The trains from Tibet travelled 4,500 kilometers through Tibet, Qinghai, Gansu, Shaanxi, Henan, Anhui, Zhejiang for 5 days, and arrived at Beilun Port, Ningbo, Zhejiang on January 4, 2017. Just like a bridge, the "Tibet" train successfully connects Lhasa with Ningbo, creating a pattern of large circulation of goods in Tibet and western China.
    2017 is the 20th anniversary of Hong Kong's returning to China and the 60th year of the connection between COSCO SHIPPING and Hong Kong. From the day of taking root in Hong Kong, COSCO SHIPPING has taken it obligatory to consolidate and enhance the international shipping center status of Hong Kong, and encouraged its subsidiaries and related industries to carry out business in Hong Kong. With its industrial influence, the Group promotes the convergence of shipping elements to Hong Kong and takes concrete actions to promote Hong Kong's economic and social prosperity.
 Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation
and the fleet was built
1957 1995
1960
Hong Kong Ocean docked the first oil tanker TAIPIENG
1966
   Case
Helping Xinjiang international train for rail-sea combined transport to achieve the first domestic Belt and Road connection
As the core area of the Silk Road Economic Belt, Xinjiang has become the frontier of China's opening to Greater Asia and Europe. On May 15, 2017, a COSCO SHIPPING container train full of Austrian high-quality wood pulp arrived in Xinjiang, and after the cargo handling in Urumqi international inland port area, the PVC products of Xinjiang were transported to Lianyungang by train, and then to Southeast Asian countries such as India through the India and Pakistan COSCO SHIPPING lines. This international rail-sea combined transport line starting from Urumqi international inland port area runs across Asia and Europe and connects the Atlantic Ocean, the Pacific Ocean, and the Indian Ocean, achieving a seamless connection of the Belt and Road.Just like a bridge, the "Tibet" train successfully connects Lhasa with Ningbo, creating a pattern of large circulation of goods in Tibet and western China.
 1994
  COSCO SHIPPING Ports acquired COSCO-International Terminal (Hong Kong Pier 8)
2016
COSCO SHIPPING Ports acquired 40% equity of Asia Container Terminal Holdings Limited
COSCO (Hong Kong)
Shipping Co., Ltd. was established
2017
Received the 2016 Prize for the Highest Total Tonnage at Hong Kong Shipping Registry
 Some major events of "COSCO SHIPPING in Hong Kong"
Increasing the proportion of fleet registration in Hong Kong
As of May 2018, the Group had a total of 271 vessels registered with Hong Kong, with a total of 29.923 million DWT, making it the single largest owner of Hong Kong ships. Due to its support to the Hong Kong Shipping Registry and its commitment to keeping excellent quality of Hong Kong registered ships, the Group has been awarded the "Prize for the Highest Registered Gross Tonnage in Hong Kong" by the Hong Kong Marine Department for 13 times by 2017, and also won the 2017 "Award for Most Supportive Hong Kong Registered Ship-owner".
Strengthening port investment and operation capabilities
In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Holdings and Shanghai International Port Group issued a voluntary comprehensive cash offer with pre-requisites to all Orient Overseas Container Line (OOCL) shareholders. In order to preserve the position of OOCL in Hong Kong, after the acquisition, OOCL will retain its brand and operate with COSCO SHIPPING in dual brands. COSCO SHIPPING will further leverage the global network advantages of both sides to contribute to the economic prosperity of Hong Kong and the construction of international shipping center.
44
Participating in economic development
The Group's companies in Hong Kong actively participate in various local economic projects and promote economic and trade exchanges. The main work for the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao Bridge which sets multiple world records and integrates bridge, island and tunnel is undertaken by COSCO Kansai Paint & Chemicals Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING Hong Kong.
COSCO SHIPPING not only promotes coordinated development in China, but also provides material transportation services for infrastructure projects along the Belt and Road with excellent quality, contributing to global coordinated development.
 Help to ease electricity shortage in Pakistan and power economic development
Help to support Java-Bali grid and boost economic growth and life improvement
Promote the construction of "Energy Tanzam Railway"
COSCO SHIPPING provided "sea-land-air" multimodal transport logistics services and professional value-added services for the Sahiwal coal-fired power station project in Pakistan. With quality service, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics was awarded the title of "Meritorious Unit of Sahiwal Power Station Project Construction" by Huaneng Group.
COSCO SHIPPING Logistics provided nearly 200,000 m3 cargo logistics services for the Indonesian Java No.7 (2×1050MW) coal-fired power generation project, and fully guaranteed the safe and smooth delivery of the project materials to the site.
COSCO SHIPPING Lines Qingdao Branch provided port agency of natural gas pipeline anti- corrosion steel tube for Tanzania natural gas processing plant and pipeline project. With quality services, it won the honorary title of "Excellent Logistics Service Provider" of the project.
   45

  GREEN DEVELOPMENT
Embracing the Earth Blue Seas and Skies
A healthy marine environment is the foundation for the sustainable development of the shipping industry. Working on the vast azure sea for a long time, COSCO SHIPPING has a natural feeling of closeness and awe to the ocean. COSCO SHIPPING has adhered to green development, creating green ships and green navigation, protecting marine biodiversity and achieving harmonious development between society and nature.
  We should resolutely abandon the development model that damages or even destroys the ecological environment, the practice of sacrificing the ecological environment in exchange for economic growth for one time period and one place, and should make good ecological environment the growth point for people's livelihood, the support point for sustained and healthy economic and social development and the starting point for showcasing China's good image, making the sky bluer, mountains greener, water cleaner and environment more beautiful in China.
-Xi Jinping
SDGs
      46
47

Green Ships and Sailing
Ships are an important factor that affects the marine ecological environment. COSCO SHIPPING attaches great importance to building and employing green ships, strengthening energy conservation and sewage management, and promoting green navigation.
Green Ships
COSCO SHIPPING has practiced the concept of green ships from ship design to dismantling of abandoned ships, vigorously carried out innovation and research of environmental technology, promoted the application of green technology in equipment, and built energy- saving and environment-friendly fleets, which sets the new standard of green ships and fundamentally guarantees COSCO SHIPPING's green and low-carbon navigation.
Green Shipping
COSCO SHIPPING spares no effort to promote green navigation. Through management and technological innovation, it improves the energy efficiency, and reduces the discharge and emission of waste water, waste gas and solid waste during the transportation.
   COSCO SHIPPING Holdings
Regulations such as the Energy Review and the Environmental Review were formulated to evaluate the energy and environment situation; the energy management system is established and implemented; energy conservation measures are divided into three categories: technical energy saving, management energy saving, and operation energy saving.
COSCO SHIPPING Energy
With informationized management methods, we actively promote the construction and use of the Group's shipping management platform and energy efficiency modules, and continuously improve the operational efficiency of ships.
COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers
To standardize and rationalize ship energy efficiency management, the Ship Energy Efficiency Management Plan is effectively implemented; the fuel consumption quota management is implemented in operating ships for each voyage, with the voyage performance assessment system carried out.
    Case
Green ship creates a new record for China's ship industry
The "COSCO SHIPPING ARIES" built by COSCO SHIPPING is one of the longest ships in the world. As a typical model of the new generation of massive container ships, the vessel is equipped with an intelligent ship energy efficiency system. It has the advantages of low fuel oil consumption, large packing capacity, high intelligence and strong adaptability to ports. The energy consumption level is far lower than that of the same-class container ships, with the energy efficiency index about 50% lower than the benchmark value, meeting future international emission standards. There is also an installation system on board for LNG (liquefied natural gas) to meet the future refitting needs of large LNG fuel tanks on specific routes.
This type of vessel has the green ship classification symbol and specific route binding force calculation classification symbol, which complies with the Code of Safe Practice for Cargo Stowage and Securing (CSS CODE) , the Hong Kong International Convention, and the Ballast Water Management Convention . The ship fully practiced the green and environmental protection concept in the design, showing COSCO SHIPPING's high sense of responsibility for the marine ecological environment.
  The ship recycling industry is an important link of the ship cyclic development industry chain. The elimination and dismantling of old ships is of great significance for the recycling of scrap resources and the reduction of marine environmental pollution. COSCO SHIPPING has selected the industry leading green ship recycling suppliers to protect the cleanness of ocean and the environment around the ship breaking yard.
In 2017, we delivered a decommissioned ship to a supplier specializing in the dismantling of green ships to ensure that the ship recycling complies with the Hong Kong International Convention and the EU's regulations on safe and pollution-free ship breaking, strictly abides by the General Code for Green Ship Recycling promulgated by the National Development and Reform Commission and other departments, and actively implements the concept of "safe, environmentally friendly and green ship breaking". For instance, untreated wastewater and solid waste must not be discharged to the waters during the ship scrapping process; environmental noise pollution is strictly controlled; the asbestos products to be removed are fully wetted with water to prevent the dust from polluting the environment.
48
49
COSCO SHIPPING's companies strengthen green navigation management
Hazardous materials such as tank wastewater, ballast water and sanitary sewage discharged by the ship, and the oil pollutant, toxic liquid and exhaust gas in a ship accident will seriously affect the marine ecological environment. COSCO SHIPPING environmentally disposes ship waste by means of strengthening the whole process control of oil refueling, fuel oil usage, oil sewage treatment, developing the ship sanitary sewage treatment and waste incineration system, scrapping the ship body pollutants, and implementing quota management and daily monitoring of main pollutants.
 Case
A comprehensive waste treatment system to ensure the effectiveness of environmental protection
In order to maintain the marine ecology and avoid garbage pollution accidents, COSCO SHIPPING Holdings has formulated a number of waste disposal rules to clarify job responsibilities and ensure the effectiveness of waste treatment.
• Under the guidance of the MARPOL 73/78 and the International Maritime Organization, the Waste Management Plan for ships is formulated
• The Operation Regulations of COSCO SHIPPING Lines for Back-to-Shore Treatment of Oily Sewage is formulated to clarify the complete operation procedures.
• The Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency Plan is formulated to reduce and control the impact of accidental oil spills.

 Green Ports
COSCO SHIPPING spares no effort to promote the construction of low-carbon ports, and keeps carrying out energy conservation and emission reduction from the aspects of personnel, technology and management. In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Ports increased their efforts in low-carbon terminal operation and implemented projects such as "oil-to-electricity", port automation upgrading and onshore power transformation to strive to create "green terminals".
COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers' first wind power installation ship "boards" semi- submerged ship to return to China
 Case
Best terminal achieves zero emission for environmental protection
 Xiamen Ocean Gate Container Terminal is the top terminal built with the efforts of COSCO SHIPPING Holdings in the core port area of Southeast International
Shipping Center, and is also China's
first complete intelligent, zero-
 emission, safe and environmentally- friendly fully automated container terminal, which can completely realize unmanned operation and is called "Demon Wharf" by the industry.
Xiamen Ocean Gate Container Terminal
Xiamen Ocean Gate Container Terminal is powered by electricity, with the whole operation process automated and the total carbon emissions dropping by about 15%. The energy consumption and emissions are significantly reduced compared with traditional terminals, which has addressed the negative impacts of traditional terminals on sustainable development due to the emission of massive carbon dioxide and exhaust gas. Meanwhile, it has improved the loading and unloading efficiency and reduced the labor cost and is a green zero-emission terminal indeed.
Supporting the Development of Clean Energy
The clean, efficient, safe and sustainable energy development is an important part of reducing energy consumption and improving air quality. COSCO SHIPPING strengthens technology R&D and multilateral cooperation, actively develops clean energy such as wind power and methanol, and expands its business while ensuring the environmental sustainability.
 Case
Super-large offshore wind power installation ship helps develop offshore wind power
In order to meet the construction needs of the world's major coastal wind power plant, Nantong COSCO SHIPYARD has developed a super-large offshore wind power installation ship that integrates various functions such as loading and transportation, self-propulsion and self-elevating, heavy lifting, dynamic positioning and offshore operations. The ship has a DP2 positioning system to meet the needs of offshore wind power hoisting, transportation and maintenance.
 Built with high technology, it is a top-end offshore wind power installation ship and an important part of the offshore wind power industry chain. Its development is favorable to the construction and operation of offshore wind plant and the development of the offshore wind power industry chain, while promoting the development and domestication of related offshore equipment and driving technological advances of the upstream raw materials and key parts supply industries.
Super-large offshore wind power installation ship
  Case
Kumport Terminal, Turkey: Green ideas make green terminal
 The Kumport terminal links the Eurasian continent and is a strategic area between the Black Sea and the Mediterranean Sea. Since the acquisition by the "Tripartite Consortium" of COSCO SHIPPING, China Merchants Port, and CIC Capital Corporation (CIC Capital) in 2015, the terminal's operating performance has been improved, becoming an important logistics node on the Belt and Road. The terminal has obtained the certification of ISO
 14001 environmental management system and OHSAS 18001 occupational health safety management system, and guarantees to meet the requirements of the green port rating system in aspects of fuel oil discharge, carbon emissions, water resources use and mechanical equipment energy conservation, etc. In April 2017, the terminal became one of the first companies to receive the "Green Port" certificate from the Turkish Ministry of Transport, Maritime Affairs and Communications, and the third container terminal in Turkey to obtain this certificate.
Turkish Kumport Terminal
50
51

 With the in-depth implementation of the international sulfur restriction policy and the maturity of green ship development, research and application, green energy has gradually become an inevitable choice for the shipping market. COSCO SHIPPING Energy continues to promote the LNG transport business and boosts the development of clean energy.
Case
"CESI BEIHAI" writes a new chapter in LNG transportation
Protecting Marine Biodiversity
The maritime business, especially the loading and unloading of ballast water, directly affects the living environment of marine life. Without institutional or conventional regulation, it will lead to marine environmental pollution and destroy marine biodiversity. COSCO SHIPPING strictly strengthens the management of ship ballast water to protect marine biodiversity.
What is ballast water?
Ballast water refers to the water loaded to the ship to control draught, trim, heel, stability or stress and the suspended solids in it. Generally, when a ship leaves the bank, the ballast tank will be loaded with ballast water to keep the ship steadily floating with certain depth in the water. For example, when a ship is unloaded, its stability and draught cannot meet the safety requirements, thus it is necessary to load
    COSCO SHIPPING Energy "CESI BEIHAI" can load 174,000 cubic meters of LNG per voyage, and it is one of the most advanced and environmentally friendly LNG ships in the world. The "CESI BEIHAI", "CESI GLADSTONE" and "CESI QINGDAO" serve on the routes from Australia to China's Beihai and Qingdao
ports, providing practical and effective energy guarantee
Informational
Note ballast water to adjust the floating state. When a ship is unevenly loaded and the local
 for natural gas users of Sinopec in Guangxi and Shandong, etc.
At present, COSCO SHIPPING LNG Investment (Shanghai) Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING Energy, has a total of 6 LNG ships in operation, with an annual transportation volume of more than 6 million tons. With the sailing of the "CESI BEIHAI" vessel, COSCO SHIPPING Energy will continue to write a new chapter for China's energy transportation and global LNG transportation.
force is too large, the stress state should be adjusted with ballast water.
        COSCO SHIPPING Development disrupts clean energy field of photovoltaic, hydropower and wind power, etc. industry and supports enterprises in green technology upgrading, equipment renewal and energy project construction with its professional financial leasing services, and promotes the development of the clean energy industry.
Case
Transmission of green energy more effectively
Dunhuang, Gansu has rich solar energy resources and land resources and is the golden zone for establishing ground photovoltaic power plants. COSCO SHIPPING Leasing provides financial leasing service support for local enterprises, to help build local photovoltaic power plants. After fully utilizing solar energy resources to generate electricity, PV power plants can transmit clean electric energy to Shaoshan, Hunan from the ultra-high voltage (UHV) of Jiuquan, Guansu, which not only effectively improves the clean energy utilization level of Gansu, but also provides sufficient support for Hunan's power demand and economic development and promotes the effective allocation of regional power resources.
Case
"CESI BEIHAI"
  COSCO SHIPPING Holdings vigorously protects marine life through multiple systems
COSCO SHIPPING Holdings' container business has 355 routes worldwide, covering five continents, 90 countries and 289 port routes. The number of routes is large and the coverage is wide. In order to reduce the impact of shipping business on marine biodiversity, the Group has developed such institutional documents as the Guidelines for Ship Ballast Water Management and the Ballast Water Management Plan . By establishing a strict system, the management is standardized and any violation of the ballast water convention is prohibited. Through strict management, COSCO SHIPPING Holdings has ensured reasonable loading and unloading of ship ballast water, which has minimized the risk of bringing foreign species into local waters in the shipping process.
  52
53

  OPENING UP
Sailing the Maritime Silk Road
In the new era of socialism with Chinese characteristics, as China opens up to the outside world, COSCO SHIPPING, a participant and helper of China's economic globalization, actively follows the development law of the open world economy, maintains openness to serve the implementation of the national strategy and builds the marine transportation channel and logistics channel for China to integrate into the global economy. COSCO SHIPPING has also formed a complete global business chain to better allocate global resources and serve global trade, providing important support for the Chinese economy to go global and achieve connectivity and common development.
  The important strategy for China to achieve new achievements is to constantly expand opening up, raise the level of opening up, and promote reform and development through opening up.
-Xi Jinping
China will not close its door to the world. We adhere to all-round opening up and continue to promote the liberalization and
-Xi Jinping
facilitation of trade and investment.
SDGs
     54
55

Piloting the World's Shipping Development
COSCO SHIPPING knows it well that only by striving for and building a world-class shipping industry leader with international competitiveness can the Group consolidate China's control and support of core transport resources and channels, better serve the implementation of national strategies, safeguard national security, and enhance the international discourse power and international influence of China's shipping industry. COSCO SHIPPING is deeply involved in global competition, allocating global resources, expanding the overall scale of the Chinese fleet, strengthening the building of international strategic pivotal hub ports and laying a global efficient service network, committed to piloting the development of global shipping.
Layout of Shipping Routes
Serving the Implementation of National Strategies
As the national backbone of the shipping industry, COSCO SHIPPING has borne in mind its responsibility and mission and been committed to serving national strategies and guidelines such as the Belt and Road initiative, the "Shipping Power" strategy and the "Manufacturing Power" strategy, actively integrating its development into the national development.
Serving the Belt and Road Initiative
With an international vision, COSCO SHIPPING participates in the implementation of the Belt and Road initiative in a deep-going way. Based on its huge fleet capacity and global service network, the Group accelerates the business expansion of ports, shipping and integrated logistics in countries and regions along the route, speeds up the "point, line and surface" layout of countries along the Belt and Road, continues to strengthen and optimize the main shipping business and enhance global competitiveness.
Port Terminals Along the Belt and Road
As one of the pioneer Chinese enterprises to explore the overseas terminal distribution, COSCO SHIPPING maintains the resolution and development strategy to promote and improve the construction of global container hub groups, and actively deploys port terminals along the Belt and Road through the establishment of diversified global terminal portfolio. Currently, the Group's terminals along the Belt and Road cover Singapore, Belgium, the Netherlands, Germany, Greece, Spain and other countries and regions. The main investment projects include: obtaining the operation rights of important hub ports and transit ports such as Piraeus Port of Greece, Abu Dhabi Khalifa Port in the UAE, Noatum Port of Spain, Zeebrugge Port of Belgium; holding shares of PSA Singapore, EUROMAX Container Terminal of Rotterdam, the Netherlands, and VADO Terminal of Italy as a major shareholder.
"The dry port project signed is a physical project and large project in promoting the construction of the New Eurasia Bridge Economic Corridor, which will surely promote greater development of the trade and logistics industries of the two countries. The government of Kazakhstan will give strong support to the project, promoting the cooperation to constantly yield fruitful results to benefit both countries and the people. "
- Askar Mamin, First Deputy Prime Minister of the Republic of Kazakhstan
 Case
Building an Asia-Europe cross-border two-way transport corridor for China and Kazakhstan
The Khorgos-Eastern Gate port, located in the Khorgos- Eastern Gate Special Economic Zone in Kazakhstan, is 15km away from the Khorgos Port of China. It takes 5 days to Lianyungang and 9 to 10 days to Europe via railway transport. It enjoys an advantageous geographical location and convenient transportation, connecting China and Western Europe via the railway line and the Western Europe - Western China International Highway.
On May 15, 2017, COSCO SHIPPING and Lianyungang Port Holding Group jointly acquired 49% equity of Khorgos- Eastern Gate. COSCO SHIPPING fully utilizes the advantages of offshore container transportation network capability and comprehensive services of land, sea and rail combined transport, and builds Khorgos-Eastern Gate into an important logistics channel node for strategic connection of China's Belt and Road initiative and Kazakhstan's "Bright Road" initiative, and further into an important hub of China- Europe and China-Asia road and bridge services, so as to provide global customers with higher-quality full supply chain service solutions and provide important logistics guarantee for the 21st Century "Silk Road Economic Belt" and "Maritime Silk Road" trade connectivity.
  COSCO SHIPPING actively optimizes the layout of global routes, improves the service quality of ship routes, and opens up the lifeline of maritime transport between China and the world. Currently, COSCO SHIPPING has built up a global maritime transportation network covering major regions of the world, with Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea,
Australia, Southeast Asia, West Asia, North America, South America, Europe,
 and Africa as radiation points and with more than 1,500 ship routes as the ties, which makes irreplaceable contribution to the prosperity of global economic and trade exchanges, especially to the maritime transportation security of China's import and export materials. In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers continuously opened the Southeast Asia route, the Persian Gulf - Red Sea route, the Europe - Mediterranean route, the West Africa and East Africa routes. COSCO SHIPPING Lines has completed the transport capacity adjustment of Africa, Latin America and South Asia lines, and opened the Northwestern Europe - Mediterranean direct route, achieving a historic breakthrough in the direct-to-market development in Europe.
Layout of Port Terminals
+ 160
Countries and regions involved in the Group's international
1,500
Ports covered by the Group's ocean routes
operation
+
 COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes the distribution of global terminals, and identifies suitable ports and terminals along the Belt and Road as well as important nodes of global trade routes, and constantly enhances the control over terminal assets. Efforts are made to improve the efficiency of terminal operations and provide overseas development support for Chinese enterprises in infrastructure construction, characteristic parks building, industrial structure adjustment, business division of labor, and output of high-quality production capacity, so as to lay the foundation for globalization.
At present, the Group's terminal network covers China's five coastal port groups as well as Hong Kong and Taiwan region, Southeast Asia, Europe, the Mediterranean and the Middle East. In 2017, COSCO
 SHIPPING actively organized domestic port integration work including project cooperation and equity transfer plan formulation of Shanghai Port and Qingdao Port, promoted the port and shipping cooperation, and improved the layout of the Group's domestic port resources. In addition, COSCO SHIPPING fully implements the Yangtze River Strategy: Participating in the Nantong Tonghai terminal investment project, reinforcing the control over key terminal nodes and warehousing resources in the lower reach of the Yangtze River; promoting the railway-river combined transport project of Wuhan Yangluo Terminal, controlling valuable shoreline resources in the middle reach of the Yangtze River, and creating a material basis and favorable conditions for the improvement of sea-rail combined transport and product innovation capabilities in the Yangtze River Basin.
56
55
Terminals funded and operated by COSCO SHIPPING
21
 Overseas terminals
57

 Ship Transport on the "Maritime Silk Road"
COSCO SHIPPING builds the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road connecting the five continents and three oceans with its route network. Through the integration of smooth and efficient trunk routes with global network, COSCO SHIPPING has not only improved the route service of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road and the service efficiency, but also connected the routes of the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road with other important emerging regional markets such as the Americas, West Africa, the Caribbean, and Northern Europe to form a more complete global network layout, thus promoting the shared development of countries and regions along the Belt and Road and injecting vitality into the regional economy along the Belt and Road. In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Lines opened the Northwestern Europe - Mediterranean direct route, achieving a historic breakthrough in the direct-to-market development in Europe.
Integrated Logistics of the Land "Silk Road"
COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes the development of the Silk Road Economic Belt and sea-rail combined transport. In opening up the logistics channel, the Group strengthens the layout of the logistics infrastructure of the "Land Silk Road", focusing on solving deficiencies and problems at shipping terminals for cargo transportation, and improves the ability in land extension businesses such as logistics, warehousing and distribution. The land and sea transports are seamlessly connected to form an economic trade tie that links Asia and Europe and radiates the world, thus realizing the smooth and efficient circulation of various trade materials between China and the world and building a bridge connecting China with the world.
COSCO SHIPPING has increased its investment in Asia-Europe sea-rail combined transport and Asia-Europe international line business, and opened nearly 10 lines including Chongqing - Shenzhen line, Chengdu - Shenzhen line, Lianyungang - Kazakhstan - Europe line and China -Russia international line. In order to properly implement the logistics infrastructure construction in the Central and Eastern Europe, COSCO SHIPPING has particularly strengthened the command of logistics resources such as railway operations, warehousing, customs declaration, sorting and distribution, and high-value cargo air transportation, opening up key links of the land, sea and air transport channels.
 Case
Exploring the "Polar Silk Road" to expand the connotation of the Belt and Road initiative
The "Polar Silk Road" is a shipping lane that crosses the Arctic Circle and connects the three economic centers of North America, East Asia, and Western Europe. In June 2017, the Vision for Maritime Cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative for the first time defined the "Arctic navigational route" as one of the three major sea lanes of the Belt and Road. On January 26, 2018, the Chinese government published the first Arctic policy document - China's Arctic Policy , proposing to "jointly building the Polar Silk Road".
 The merchant ship Yong Sheng of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers opened the ice-breaking tour in 2013, becoming the first Chinese merchant ship that successfully
reached Europe via the Arctic northeast
channel. As of 2017, COSCO SHIPPING
 Specialized Carriers had dispatched 10 ships and completed the polar navigation missions of 14 Arctic northeast lane voyages and 22 module transport voyages to Arctic Circle, with a total of 465,000 tons of goods transported. Specifically, in 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers sent a total of five ships to travel to and from the Arctic in the "window period", mainly carrying goods including equipment, steel and pulp, to explore to expand the scale of Chinese merchant ship's project- based and normalized voyage to the Arctic. The exploration and practice of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers on the "Polar Silk Road" has enriched the connotation of the Belt and Road initiative and played a positive role in promoting Made-in-China to go global, European goods to export the Far East, and the prosperity of Asia-Europe trade.
The "Yong Sheng" ship returned to China after successfully completing the first Antarctic expedition service.
  Case
Opening up the "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line" to create a mutually beneficial situation
COSCO SHIPPING has opened up the "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line", transporting Chinese goods from domestic ports to Piraeus Port, and then transporting them through the existing railway from Piraeus Port to Hungary, which forms a China-Europe land-sea combined transport mode. On the basis of the China and Europe trade route – the "21st Century Maritime Silk Road", COSCO SHIPPING connects Piraeus Port to the "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line", thus extending the "21st Century Maritime Silk Road" to the interior of Europe and creating a road to mutually beneficial results.
COSCO SHIPPING has played an important role in promoting bilateral economic and trade exchanges between China and Panama. The long-term development and efforts of COSCO SHIPPING in Panama are commendable. We are very grateful to COSCO SHIPPING for the cooperation in Panama and its contribution to the sea transport and economy.
- Panamanian President Juan Carlos Varela
 58
59

   36
Total domestic terminals engaged along the Belt and Road
9
Foreign terminals engaged
The second phase of the container terminal of Khalifa Port
117
The cumulatively liner services provided every week
Serving the "Shipping Power" Strategy
For a long time, the shipping industry has undertaken more than 90% of China's foreign trade cargo transport volume, and is an indispensable strategic service industry concerning the national security and lifelines of the national economy. "Building the road is the first step to become rich". China must strengthen the shipping power construction to become a maritime power. COSCO SHIPPING has constantly strengthened technological innovation, improved the technology and equipment level for ocean exploring and actively explored the polar areas to contribute to the country's building into a maritime power.
 180+
Container ships invested in the container liners along the Belt and Road as of the end of 2017
 Case
Constructing the first ultra-deep sea workboat, and promoting the marine equipment construction capability to a new level
 Dalian COSCO SHIPYARD, a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry, builds a series of ultra-deep marine working vessel for MAERSK, Denmark. The first ship "Maersk Installer" made by it was delivered on October 16, 2017. The vessel is currently the world's newest ultra-deep marine
working ship, the first ship of the same type exported and
 the first Maersk marine project undertaken by the Chinese shipyard. Its successful construction and delivery has enhanced the visibility and brand image of China's offshore equipment manufacturing industry in the international market, and is of great significance in promoting China shipyard's continual development in the international mainstream ultra-deep marine workboat market.
The "Maersk Installer"
160,000 TEU
60%
The proportion of capacity invested along the Belt and Road compared to the capacity of operation fleets
Capacity of all container ships invested
  50%
The proportion of shipping space invested in countries and regions along the Belt and Road
120,000TEUs
Total shipping space
 Case
Polar exploration to serve the construction of polar power
The polar region is a "new strategic territory" that concerns national interests. The polar power construction is an important part of the construction of maritime power. As the earliest and most experienced shipping enterprise in China to explore the polar navigation, COSCO SHIPPING has constantly explored the polar and ocean mysteries and moved towards a wider range of fields and higher levels.
In 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers sent a total of five ships to travel to and from the Arctic to further expand the scale of commercial operations via the northeastern Arctic channel and lay a solid foundation for establishing the normalized operation for Arctic navigation. The normal operation of the Arctic route will expand the Belt and Road and can significantly promote Made-in-China equipment to go global, increase the European market share and facilitate European goods to export to the Far East. In addition, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers also completed the transportation mission for the construction of Brazil's Ferraz research expedition station - the world's first Antarctic commercial research expedition station project, which creates a precedent for merchant ships to transport construction materials for scientific expedition stations.
  China-Europe Train at Hamburg Port
27
58million tons
The Group's oil shipping volume along the Belt and Road
45million tons
The Group's dry bulk shipping volume along the Belt and Road
  60
Major ports and inland stations covered
61
Provinces, autonomous regions, municipalities directly under the central government covered by COSCO
SHIPPING's more than 150 operating container sea-rail lines
91
The airbus project at Hamburg Port
Scan to watch the video
 A new chapter for the new century sea silk road
The "Netherlands" ship starts the China- Europe maritime Silk Road voyage
The Faraway Home: The Belt and Road Initiative - Dubai, UAE

 Serving the "Manufacturing Power" Strategy
While actively helping Made-in-China to go global, COSCO SHIPPING has upgraded the quality of its manufacturing and services through R&D and innovation, and led the Chinese shipping industry to upgrade from "Made in China" to "China Services".
 Case
Helping China's nuclear power products to go global
As the knock-out products in China's nuclear power export, "Hualong One" is a key equipment of Pakistan nuclear power project for which COSCO SHIPPING provides the whole process logistics. With advanced hardware equipment, safe and reliable transportation plan, rigorous and reasonable fleet organization and serious and responsible coordination and communication, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers helps improve the international reputation of "Made in China".
   Case
Providing shipbuilding equipment for the Zvezda Shipyard and helping Russia enter the era of large-tonnage shipbuilding
As a large shipyard controlled by Rosneft Oil, the most important part of Zvezda Shipyard is the open-type heavy shipbuilding platform which is equipped with seven large cranes all built by Nantong COSCO Heavy Industry Co., Ltd. BECTИ RU reported that, "The durations of the design, manufacturing and installation of bulky lifting equipment supplied by China have all broken Russian records. With huge cranes, the Zvezda Shipyard heavy shipbuilding platform opens a new era in Russian large-tonnage ship manufacturing history. "
Scan to watch the video
"Layout in the Ocean", episode 5, Season II of the Heavy Equipment of the Great Power
  62
63
The "Da De" vessel of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers is hoisting key equipment for Pakistan nuclear power project at Dalian Port

  SHARING
Making Joint Efforts to Build a Better Future
 Sharing is the starting point and the foothold of sustainable development. With the mission of becoming an excellent leader of the world shipping industry, COSCO SHIPPING adheres to opening up and cooperation, inclusiveness and sharing, and utilizes its own advantages to promote sustainable development worldwide. We strive to create an environment for harmonious coexistence with our stakeholders and achieve common development with employees and communities.
  The world has become a global village where our interests are intertwined and our economic and social progress interconnected. To promote common prosperity and development in today's world, we have no choice but to pursue greater connectivity and integrated development.
-Xi Jinping
SDGs
       64
65

Joining Hands with Employees to Move Forward
COSCO SHIPPING adheres to "employee-oriented" values to improve the Group's employee management, training and care mechanisms. We build platforms for employees to develop their potential and creativity, care for their happiness and grow together with them.
Staff Management
COSCO SHIPPING attaches great importance to the protection of employees' basic rights and interests, strictly abides by applicable laws and regulations such as the Labor Law and the Labor Contract Law , and signs labor contracts with employees and pays social insurance for them. In addition, we place emphasis on staff management, selection and incentives and optimize the corresponding systems to provide a solid institutional guarantee for the development and training of staff.
2017 2016
%
2017 2016
%
2017 2016
%
2017 2016
100
100
0 100
Labor contract singing rate
Persons 35000
30000 25000 20000 15000 10000
5000 0
Persons 2500
2000 1500 1000
500 0
Persons 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000
0
Seafarers 30,420
2017
Minority employees
1,980
2016
Education structure of staff 4%
    29,801
2016
Master oy above
College Lower education
   35%
 28%
33%
  Bachelor degree
   Overall plan for employee development:
Strategic employee management system:
100
100
Staff age proportion
  The "13th Five-Year" Staff Development Plan of COSCO SHIPPING
Recruitment and configuration, career development, job management, performance management, education and training, salary incentives, "six in one"
0
Social insurance payment rate
100
  41%
 15%
 28%
16%
 Standardizing the professional manager system:
Employment planning
Employee development mechanism:
1,804
2017
Aged 35 or above Aged 41-50
Aged 35-40 Aged 50 above
 Market-based selection, contract management, and differentiated pay incentives
Market-oriented allocation, differentiated incentives and scientific cultivation
100
100
  Establishing an internal human resources market:
  Revitalizing employee resources, adjusting the employee team structure, and optimizing the staffing
Stimulating the vitality of employees to inject impetus to the Group's development
Work shift and exchanges:
0 100
Proportion of different specialties 3%
Senior technician or senior title
Technician or intermedium title Junior,intermediate,senior worker or junior title No title or technical rank
  Designing the pay system::
Domestic and overseas work shift and exchange
Returning rate after maternity/ parental leave
19.4
Employees from Hong Kong, Macao,Taiwan,and foreign countries
8,143
Staff selection
Allocating cadres with multi- perspective assessments
20%
 35%
42%
 Strengthening the linkage between pay and benefits, establishing a globalized,
Employee incentives
of excellent employees to improve their comprehensive abilities
8,091
  market-oriented, diversified, and differentiated modern
Integrated analysis and judgment:
 remuneration system
19.6 Proportion of female employees
 Promoting diversified incentives:
Open selection:
Equity incentive
Creating a fair, open and transparent selection and employment environment
% 0
25
 2016
2017
 66
67

Career Development
COSCO SHIPPING optimizes and completes the employee training system by creating a positive learning and cultural atmosphere in the Group and providing employees with attractive platforms for capacity building and career development.
Happy Life
COSCO SHIPPING cares about the lives of its employees and actively solves the difficulties regarding children's entering schools, medical care and housing for them. The labor unions at all levels carry out activities such as "May 1st Serious Diseases", "Student Grants", and "National Day's Support" to send care to employees in need.
In response to the challenges of hot weather in summer, COSCO SHIPPING gives high-temperature relief in summer and brings care to front-line employees. The Group has introduced measures such as peak shifting, improving working environment and diet and providing medicine to create a comfortable working environment for employees and safeguard their health.
COSCO SHIPPING provides comprehensive care for female employees. We hold training courses for female employees to help them improve their professional competitiveness.
636persons
Helping children of employees
More than 1.02million yuan Issuing student grants
   Optimizing the training system Training strategy
Formulating the Key Points for the Group's 2017 Cadre Education Work, and clearly carrying out training and education work around the "6 + 1" strategy
Hierarchical employee development plan
Sailing plan, Pilot plan, Voyage plan
Internal lecturer team
Inheriting the unique experience and wisdom of the Group
Online training platform
12,635persons
Helping Employees in need
14.185million yuan
Issuing relief funds
        Building COSCO SHIPPING online learning platform, and encouraging employees to enrich professional
Building key teams of staff
High-end professional employees Excellent young cadres International staff Supervisor management employees Crew staff Party building staff
36.041million yuan
Issuing consolation money
159,243persons
Greeting first-line employees
 knowledge in spare time
  Staff development and cultivation of COSCO SHIPPING
  Case
The "Voyage Plan" facilitates the growth of young and middle-aged executives
COSCO SHIPPING has formulated the "Voyage Plan" to systematically train young and middle-aged executives. Through the three stages of centralized training, post-practice, and centralized discussion and exchange, the theoretical literacy of young and middle-aged senior executives is improved, the macro vision is expanded and the management capabilities are enhanced, thereby promoting their career development.
 68
69
Female paint workers

We advocate employees to balance work and life and carry out rich cultural and sports activities to help them release work pressure and improve their quality of life.
The "Racing Banana Boat" competition at the water sports event
The employee performance to celebrate the 19th CPC National Congress
   Caring for the Crew
The crew work and live on ships all the year round, and their work is inseparable from the living environment. COSCO SHIPPING strives to create a comfortable living space, healthy entertainment and leisure facilities, scientific and nutritious meals and a physical and mental health management system for them, so as to provide for a happy life.
 Case
The Voyage • Health program escorts the crew's mental health
  Improving the professional expertise of managers
Building an instant communication platform
Professional training and qualification examination on psychological
COSCO SHIPPING has opened the "Sea Voyage Psychological Guide Station" WeChat public account for the crew,
counseling were conducted to improve the psychological counseling and
to popularize maritime mental health knowledge, reduce pressure of and
intervention skills and abilities of crew managers and ship leaders, to
create communication channels for the crew, and provide psychological assistance to them at any time.
provide professional mental health assistance to the crew.
Participating in thematic exchanges and sharing
COSCO SHIPPING participated in the 2017 World Transportation Convention (WTC) Maritime Psychology Forum to share and learn the experience on maritime mental health
to provide more professional and complete mental health assistance
for the crew.
Voyage · Health
The crew's mental health care system: The Voyage . Health program
 The employee calligraphy interest group
 Fun sports of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers
  Scan to watch the video
   Day of the Seafarer-Voyage, Shipping log on Maritime Silk Road: because of the sea Gyms on the ocean
71
 70
The employee climbing activity

 Jointly Creating the Future for the Community
COSCO SHIPPING cherishes the harmonious symbiotic relationship with communities. We share industry experience and advantages with the community to enhance the professional expertise and capability of community staff. We carry out charity activities and participate in maritime rescue to give back to the community's support for the development of the Group.
Developing Industry Staff
Through the construction of maritime knowledge base, school-enterprise cooperation, and creation of industry standards, COSCO SHIPPING shares its own navigation experience and knowledge with the community, so as to reserve employee resources for the development of the shipping industry and boost the sustainable development of the industry.
  Building a nautical knowledge base
Cultivating industry staff
We implement the national "Maritime Power" strategy, and undertake the nautical science library project of Chinese Society for Oceanography, providing rich resources for sea-related knowledge.
Through signing cooperation agreements, opening ships to college students, and senior leaders holding adjunct professorship at universities, we work with universities and colleges to serve the development of future high-quality maritime staff with our resources and advantages.
   Building
Qingdao Ocean Shipping Marines College issued the Use Requirements for Engine Room Simulators to align with the international standards, which has promoted the standardization of simulator teaching and evaluation, and improved the quality of crew training and international recognition of Chinese seafarers.
industry standards
 72
Philanthropy
COSCO SHIPPING has paid attention to and actively engaged in charity. COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation has continuously improved the charity management system and launched the "Voyage" series of projects to share the development results of the Group with the community from the aspects of education, health and public welfare activities, passing on the power of love, fairness and justice.
Spread the concept of environmental protection
  Employees are organized to participate in the philanthropy long-distance running
Care for the next generation
In the Manchu Central School of Hebei Province, the charity donation activities were carried out.
Since 2016, the "Voyage · Dream" healthy drinking water project and sports field project were launched in Xinjiang minority primary and middle schools.
campaign to raise funds for building water storage and purification facilities in dry areas, and convey the low-carbon and environmentally friendly concept to the
public.
  Organize blood drives
The "We Undertake Together" youth blood drives were carried out to donate blood to people in the earthquake-stricken areas of Jiuzhaigou.
Employees are regularly organized for blood drives, with the highest cumulative blood donation volume of 2,000cc.
Philanthropy initiatives of COSCO SHIPPING
Support earthquake relief
5,000 family relief boxes, totaling 1.5 million yuan were donated to Jiuzhaigou earthquake-stricken areas.
Provide clean drinking water
260,000 RMB was invested to carry out reservoir drinking
water renovation project in Yanjiazhuang Village to solve water difficulties for residents and
 provide clean drinking water for community residents.
73

Maritime Rescue
COSCO SHIPPING sees it as its task to pilot safe navigation and participates in global maritime rescue to maintain the safety of maritime navigation. In 2017, we overcame unfavorable weather and other marine operating conditions to participate in and assist with 38 maritime rescues, during six of which COSCO SHIPPING saved 29 lives and fully demonstrated the Group's professionalism and international humanitarian spirit.
Overseas Duty Performance
Under the Belt and Road initiative, COSCO SHIPPING pushes on the overseas business and actively integrates into the local community while helping overseas economic development.
Cultivation of Overseas Industry Staff
Through the school-enterprise cooperation and rotation exchanges, COSCO SHIPPING enhances the professional skills and qualities of local staff to promote the career development of local industry staff.
Maritime rescues by COSCO SHIPPING February 11, 2017
COSCO SHIPPING Bulk's "Fu Rong Feng" ship worked with RCC AUSTRAL to rescue 14 foreign mariners on the Panamanian cargo ship, and received written thanks from RCC AUSTRAL.
February 28, 2017
The "Da Ji" ship of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers successfully rescued 10 foreign crew members from the waterlogged "ANNA" vessel in the Mediterranean, which was praised and affirmed by embassies, marine boards and port authorities of many countries.
April 3, 2017
The "Far Eastern Mercury" ship of Tianjin Cosbulk Ship Management Co., Ltd. overcame the bad weather at sea and saved a foreign female sailor on the yacht "CLIMATE ACTION NOW", who was sailing alone in Antarctica.
October 16, 2017
The "Guo Tou 305" ship of Guangzhou Ship Management Center assisted the Hong Kong Marine Department in understanding the actual situation of the cargo ship HIGHWAY STAR that was in danger and reported the situation to it to facilitate the development of an optimal solution.
Rescue photo of the "Da Ji" ship
    Case
Spreading the wisdom of COSCO SHIPPING on the Panama Canal
Since 2006, COSCO SHIPPING Holdings has cooperated with Panamanian local universities such as International Maritime University of Panama to promote an internship program. By providing internships for local college students, we enable local students who are interested in shipping to experience real maritime work, help them understand more about the industry and enhance their professional competitiveness.
 Creating Local Employment Opportunities
COSCO SHIPPING adheres to localized employment and creates direct and indirect employment opportunities for overseas communities to jointly build a future of sustainable development.
COSCO SHIPPING West Asia Company creates employment opportunities for local people while expanding overseas business. With the management experience of COSCO SHIPPING as the engine and local industry staff as the driving force, COSCO SHIPPING West Asia Company has achieved steady development.
    December 3, 2017
Rescue picture of the "Yu Zhong Hai" ship
Scan to watch the video
122
Total employees of COSCO SHIPPING West Asia Company as of November 2017
105
Local employees
Chinese expatriates
5,000 jobs
Indirect employment created for outsourced laborers by Turkey Kumport Port Company in 2017
   74
75
The "CSCL Indian Ocean" ship assisted TARIFAMRCC in rescuing a power-losing boat, saving three sailors, which received praise from the TARIFAMRCC and the rescued boat.
December 4, 2017
COSCO Qingdao's " Yu Zhong Hai" ship rescued foreign sailor on a Togolese ship - "Shenghailun" in the sea, and won high praise from Weihai Marine Rescue Center, "Bei Hai Jiu 111" ship and naval ships.
17
18 jobs
Job creation for disabled people
The rescue in the Mediterranean

 Promoting the Integration of Domestic and Foreign Culture
Guided by a global vision in the overseas development, COSCO SHIPPING encourages Chinese employees to learn local languages and actively integrate into local culture and life. The overseas companies of the Group regularly hold employee activities and build the communication platform for Chinese and foreign employees and promote employee exchanges and cultural integration.
COSCO SHIPPING provides transportation services for the Silk Road Fraternity Fund
 Case
"WE ARE FAMILY"
such as bowling, mountain climbing, and yoga to promote employee communication and cultural integration. The Chinese employees in Indonesia have mastered the Indonesian language and learned to ride motorcycles. The culture of "WE ARE FAMILY" has been supported and recognized by the staff.
Picture of the employees' team building activity
"I've been working in COSCO SHIPPING Malaysia for more than 12 years. I deeply feel the Chinese company COSCO SHIPPING's inclusiveness and understanding of local employees. Although our cultural backgrounds are different, we are united and work in harmony and happily. I even forget that the company is not a local one."
 Most of Xinxinhai Company's (New Golden Sea Shipping Pte. Ltd.) employees are from Southeast Asia and the complex cultural backgrounds of employees bring challenges to daily work communication. With the core culture of "WE ARE FAMILY", the company established "Captain
panda family club" to regularly carry out activities
  -Ailyn, Malaysian, staff of COSCO SHIPPING Malaysia Company
Scan to watch the video
WE ARE READY
Promoting the Improvement of Local Medical Level
Together with Red Cross Society of China, COSCO SHIPPING provides medical assistance to countries along the Belt and Road to improve local medical resources and provide guarantee for the healthy and sustainable development of overseas communities.
On February 20, 2017, Chinese Red Cross Foundation (CRCF) established the "Silk Road Fraternity Fund" to provide medical aids to countries and regions along the Belt and Road. As a co-sponsor of the "Silk Road Fraternity Fund", COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation donated transport services for the project.
The China-Parkistan Emergency Corridor is the first overseas medical assistance station, designed to build up the China-Parkistan philanthropy medical center in Gwadar Port to provide medical assistance to the local area. Since the launch of the first batch of medical supplies for Pakistan in March 2017, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation has donated transportation services for three batches of overseas medical materials of the "Silk Road Fraternity Fund", with the donations amounting to 763,800 RMB.
 Case
COSCO SHIPPING North America Company promotes integration by action
In March 2017, COSCO SHIPPING North America Company organized the 2016 "Local Model Workers" to China for visit and inspection in order to understand the corporate culture of COSCO SHIPPING. Through the inspection and study at the Group, overseas employees' understanding of COSCO SHIPPING culture was enhanced, which promoted cultural integration between employees and the Group. In addition, COSCO SHIPPING North America Company launched the Health Day activity to provide a platform for communication between employees and promote the integration of Chinese and local employees.
 76
77

 Prospects for 2018
Innovation
We will adhere to our innovation-driven development strategy and speed up to enhance our innovation capacity. We will keep a close watch on the frontier of technology, reinforce our independent R&D capabilities and help the Group continue to develop towards the "green, intelligent and high-end" goal. We will vigorously cultivate innovative staff, set up scientific research platforms, and provide sufficient conditions and opportunities for the development of scientific and technological staff. We will closely follow market demand, innovate business models and develop full- service supply chain logistics through transformation.
Coordination
We will continuously attach importance to safety production and focus on improving the level of "essential security". We will constantly improve our people-oriented customer service and respond to market changes to meet the increasingly diversified, complex and systematic needs of customers. We will actively promote supplier responsibility management, propel suppliers to continually improve their social responsibility management awareness and ability of responsibility performing, and push sustainable and healthy development of the supply chain. We will further strengthen exchanges and cooperation and personnel training in the shipping industry, and promote China's shipping industry advancement. We will spare no efforts in building the world's leading integrated logistics supply chain service provider, accelerate the flow of production factors, better serve national strategies such as Yangtze River Economic Zone and Beijing- Tianjin-Hebei Integration, and promote the coordinated development of China and the world.
Green Development
We will aim at green development goals, strengthen research on environmental technology innovation, promote the application of green technology and equipment, and create an energy-saving and environment-friendly fleet. We will improve energy efficiency and reduce waste emissions, and achieve green navigation. We will promote "oil-to- electricity", port automation upgrading and onshore power transformation projects, and strive to build low-carbon green terminals. We will strengthen technology R&D and multilateral cooperation, give impetus to the development of clean energy such as wind power and methanol, and promote the LNG clean energy transportation business. We will strictly strengthen ship ballast water management and protect marine biodiversity, and realize the harmonious development between human and nature.
Opening Up
We will continue to focus on global operations, build and improve the global route network distribution, strengthen the construction of strategic international hub ports, and build marine transportation channels and logistics channels for China to integrate into the global economy. We will provide important support for the Chinese economy to go global, achieve global interconnection and common development. We will actively shoulder the missions of the state and actively get involved in such national strategies as the Belt and Road Initiative, the "Shipping Power", and the "Manufacturing Power" initiatives. We will actively support the global distribution of Chinese enterprises with our global integrated supply chain services and localized advantages accumulated over the years to create a new reputation for the globalized operation of Chinese enterprises, and be committed to making greater contributions to promoting the common and sustainable development of the enterprise, industry, and international regional economy.
Sharing
We are committed to sharing development results with employees and society. By improving the employee management and incentive system, we will build six key employee teams and expand the COSCO maritime employee pool, care for employees' health, life and career development, and create an attractive growth platform for them. We will contribute to the social development of local area with our industry advantages, share maritime knowledge and navigation experience to promote the development of local industry staff, carry out philanthropy, improve the level of education, medical care and people's livelihood infrastructure services, and boost the overall development of local community.
79
       78

Expert review
Since its reform and restructuring in 2016, China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited has carried forward the advantages of COSCO Group and China Shipping Group in sustainable development management, and actively exerted its overall efforts to organically integrate enterprise operation with economic, social and environmental responsibilities. In this report, I am deeply impressed by China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited's profound sense of social responsibility and its determination and actions to closely connect its own development with the development of the shipping industry, the fate of the country and the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. After reading China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited Sustainability Report 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the "Report"), I find that it has three distinctive features.
Since the publication of the United Nations 2030 Sustainable Development Goals (hereinafter referred to as UN 2030 SDGs) in September 2015, stakeholders, including enterprises, have further defined the direction and priorities of global sustainable development. As a pioneer in promoting a sustainable and inclusive global economy, the United Nations Global Compact, the world's largest sustainable development organization, also actively guides and promotes enterprises' contribution to the achievement of sustainable development goals. I am very pleased to see the positive actions taken by China COSCO Shipping in exploring sustainable development and in implementing the UN 2030 SDGs in its Sustainability Report 2017 (hereinafter referred to as the "Report").
It is a high-level report on the implementation of the five development concepts. In this report, China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited has set up a reporting framework around the five development concepts. Each chapter begins with a quotation from President Xi Jinping as an interpretation of the development concepts, and systematically discloses in the following text the Corporation's actions and performance in fulfilling the five development concepts. Through the systematic disclosure of the Corporation's fulfillment of responsibilities, such as continuously strengthening its innovation ability and level, boosting regional coordinated development, promoting ecological progress, upgrading green shipping development, serving the national strategy and global development with an open mind, and sharing and making common progress with all sectors of society, the report explains the characteristics of China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited's spontaneous, conscious and voluntary fulfillment of social responsibilities, and reflects the Corporation's adherence to policy strategy and the needs of the times, as well as its continuously improving level of social responsibility management and its commitment to keep pace with the times. This is a report that vividly reflects the enterprise's current situation of sustainable development governance and practice and realizes communication with stakeholders.
Enterprise mobility lays a foundation for promoting the achievement of the UN 2030 SDGs and for creating harmonious development between enterprises and the environment and society. In terms of content, the report, themed "driving integration and promoting value", details the comprehensive social responsibility management concept and practice network developed by China COSCO Shipping after in-depth reflection of industry attributes and enterprise advantages, and shows the breadth of China COSCO Shipping in fulfilling its social responsibility. Consisting of two topics and five chapters, the Report vividly reflects the comprehensive value creation process of the Corporation. By presenting China COSCO Shipping's vision of shaping its core value with innovative ideas, leading industry and supply chain enterprises and balancing the development of different regions with ideas of coordination, promoting marine environmental protection with green development ideas, serving the development of global trade with opening up philosophy, and promoting the win-win cooperation between enterprises and communities with the sharing concept, the report fully displays the responsible corporate image of China COSCO Shipping and its vision and spirit as a leader actively assuming its social responsibility.
It is a report closely related to the theme of the times. In the report, two special topics are set up on responsibility focus and social focus respectively to interpret the depth that China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited goes to fulfill its social responsibility and the scope of its sustainable development. Responsibility Focus I centers on two stories, "7 people" commitment and "the same pairs of chopsticks", which vividly demonstrate China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited's overseas CSR practice in building and operating the Piraeus port with Chinese passion. Responsibility Focus II discloses China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited's efforts to strengthen poverty alleviation management, poverty alleviation actions in industry, education, employment and infrastructure, as well as the story of poverty alleviation story in Tibet for 16 years, which fully reveals the Corporation's management, practices and achievements in poverty alleviation.
In terms of framework, the report systematically discloses substantive issues with industry and enterprise characteristics from two dimensions, management methods, and accountability practices and performance, according to the requirements of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Standards, showing its early planning, implementation and follow-up of various aspects of management, and further illustrating the depth that China COSCO Shipping goes in fulfilling its corporate social responsibility. At the same time, the report shows that China COSCO Shipping, as a global enterprise, is fully aware of its responsibilities and clear about its mission. The excellent cases in the report can be used as references by other enterprises as they set examples for them to fulfill their social responsibilities and to promote the implementation of sustainable development goals.
It is a report that offers pleasant reading experience. The language style is cordial and solemn, supplemented by comments from key stakeholders such as Greek Prime Minister and vertically comparable performance, which reflects China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited's active implementation of the national strategy and its emphasis on overseas accountability information disclosure in its process of "going global". The language is simple but touching, supplemented by comments from stakeholders such as the Former Deputy Head of Luolong County People's Government and local poverty alleviation performance. As far as forms are concerned, the report is flexible and diversified, with diversified presentation methods such as live pictures, logic diagrams and video QR codes, which make the report more attractive and readable while enhancing its credibility.
On the whole, this is a high quality report on sustainable development with succinct content, beautiful language, reasonable chart arrangement and vivid and detailed data. I hope China COSCO Shipping can further analyze the value chain on the basis of current management and in light of the Corporation's business operations, focus on a number of specific sustainable development goals, adopt general international standards, and set more specific, quantifiable and measurable corporate goals. It is expected that China COSCO Shipping will continue to bravely shoulder its social responsibility in its future development and play an exemplary role in creating a community of shared futures and promoting the sustainable development of the world.
I am very pleased and impressed to see China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited make such remarkable achievements in social responsibility performance in 2017. In the future, I hope that the Corporation would always stick to its commitments and shoulder its responsibilities to make further progress on the road of sustainable development and create more value for the people, for the country and for the world.
Han Bin
80
81
Secretary of ISO 26000 Stakeholder Global Network Chief Expert of Goldenbee Think-tank
Yin Gefei
Executive Secretary-General of the Global Compact Network China

GRI Content Index
Indicator
102-1 Name of the organization
102-2 Activities, brands, products, and services
102-3 Location of headquarters
102-4 Location of operations
102-5 Ownership and legal form
102-6 Markets served
102-7 Scale of the organization
102-8 Information on employees and other workers
102-9 Supply chain
102-10 Significant changes to the organization and its supply chain
102-11 Precautionary Principle or approach 102-12 External initiatives
102-13 Membership of associations
102-14 Statement from senior decision-maker
102-16 Values, principles, standards, and norms of behavior
102-17 Mechanisms for advice and concerns about ethics 102-18 Governance structure
102-40 List of stakeholder groups
102-41 Collective bargaining agreements 102-42 Identifying and selecting stakeholders
102-43 Approach to stakeholder engagement
102-45 Entities included in the consolidated financial statements
102-46 Defining report content and topic Boundaries 102-50 Reporting period
102-52 Reporting cycle
Position
Company Profile
Our Vision
Company Profile Global Routes & Ports Company Profile
Our Vision, Global Routes & Ports Staff Management
Staff Management
Harmonious Supply Chains
Harmonious Supply Chains
Risk Management
About this Report, Serving the Implementation of National Strategies
Industry Exchanges and Cooperation Message from the Chairman
Company Profile, Integrity and Compliance
Integrity and Compliance Organizational Structure
Communication and Participation of Stakeholders
Staff Management
Communication and Participation of Stakeholders
Communication and Participation of Stakeholders
About this Report
About this Report About this Report About this Report
Indicator
102-53 Contact point for questions regarding the report
102-54 Claims of reporting in accordance with the GRI standards
102-55 GRI content index
GRI 203:Indirect Economic Impacts
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
203-1 Infrastructure investments and services supported
GRI 205: Anti-corruption
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
205-1 Operations assessed for risks related to corruption
205-2 Communication and training about anti- corruption policies and procedures
GRI 302:Energy
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
Position
Reader Feedback Questionnaire About this Report, GRI Content Index GRI Content Index
Promoting Poverty Alleviation Management
Actions of Poverty Alleviation, Poverty Alleviation Story- "Sixteen years in Tibet", Promoting Regional Development
Integrity and Compliance
Integrity and Compliance Integrity and Compliance
Green Shipping, Green Ports
Data 2017
Green Ships, Green Ports
Protecting Marine Biodiversity
Protecting Marine Biodiversity
   GRI 102: General Disclosures
             Organizational profile
Reporting practice
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
 203-2 Significant indirect economic impacts
 Actions of Poverty Alleviation, Construction of Industry Standards, Cultivation of Overseas Industry Staff, Creating Local Employment Opportunities
           Strategy
Ethics and integrity
Governance
Stakeholder engagement
Reporting practice
302-1 Energy consumption within the organization 302-5 Reductions in energy requirements of products
          and services GRI 304:Biodiversity Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;
    The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
 304-2 Significant impacts of activities, products, and services on biodiversity GRI 305:Emissions
     GRI 103:Management Approach
 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
   Supporting the Development of Clean Energy
  82
83

  Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
GRI 103:Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
Indicator
305-1 Direct (Scope 1) GHG emissions
305-7 Nitrogen oxides (NOx), sulfur oxides (SOx), and other significant air emissions
GRI 306:Effluents and Waste
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
306-2 Waste by type and disposal method
GRI 308:Supplier Environmental Assessment
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
308-1 New suppliers that were screened using environmental criteria GRI 401:Employment
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
401-2 Benefits provided to full-time employees that are not provided to temporary or part-time employees
401-3 Parental leave
GRI 403:Occupational Health and Safety
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
GRI 404:Training and Education
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
404-2 Programs for upgrading employee skills and transition assistance programs
GRI 414:Supplier Social Assessment
Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; The management approach and its components; Evaluation of the management approach
414-1 New suppliers that were screened using social criteria
Position
Data 2017 Data 2017
Green Ships, Green Shipping Data 2017
Harmonious Supply Chains
Harmonious Supply Chains
Staff Management
Staff Management, Happy Life, Caring for the Crew
Staff Management
Consolidating Safety, Happy Life, Caring for the Crew
Career Development
Career Development
Harmonious Supply Chains
Harmonious Supply Chains
Reader Feedback Questionnaire
We sincerely look forward to your comments and suggestions and will carefully read and study the feedback of every recipient of this 2017 Sustainability Report of China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited. Your comments and suggestions are an important basis for the continuous promotion of our CSR management and practice, so please feel free to fill in the following form, detach it, and send it to us by mail or fax. We sincerely welcome and appreciate for your highly valued advice!
Your information
Name: Workplace:
Telephone: E-mail:
1. Your overall assessment of COSCO SHIPPING's social responsibility performance:
    □ Very good □ Good □ Fair
2. Your overall assessment of this report:
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair
3. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair
4. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair
5. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair
6. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair
7. Do you think the content and layout of this report were made easy to read? □ Yes □ No
8. What information of concern to you was not disclosed in this report?
□ Poor
  □ Poor
performance in communication with stakeholders? □ Poor
performance of economic responsibility?
□ Poor
performance of environmental responsibility?
□ Poor
performance of social responsibility?
□ Poor
         9. What are your comments and suggestions on COSCO SHIPPING's fulfillment of social responsibility and this report as a whole?
     84
85

Address: 687 Dongdaming Road, Shanghai, China
Tel: 021-6596 6666
Fax: 021-6596 6886
Website: www.coscoshipping.com


-------cosco_csr_report_2018___________
cosco PHiz sick AARAA

SHIPPING
CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED
SZ

2018
SUSTAINABILITY REPORT


KIB

HRS tel 7T

AG eH Bin ee SH APRA A Be Sal at
AAVS PTAA, READERS
ACL APB SIAL. Pik, DACA Se
MmARA SE. NUTR ERNST.

Bia) $3 Ee]

AHA ALA 2018 4 (2018 1A 1 A—2018 # 12
A318) WaMAT, BONA DANEEL.

he oH

RoMRENESMAAE SHE in eeee AA
ARPBAAL, AMMESMAASRARBAAL,
BEMAANAS

Ts Riz

AREES CHARA RBMEB MS (GR RHE
FetR Em HE) (GRI Standards), GB/T 36001 (#2
feb Sise) . Biriwe 482 |SO «ISO 26000: #
emtism (2010) ). RAH (2030 SAHA
@) Saal.

(EER

ASRS Fri AY (Ss SSG TA Bn ie A PR
ARIA BBS AT Bie

is Mis

BARBS BIRAG "STA " BEER"; >
" ULES ESA BRA A] "STAY " BRU "}
MBO AARAA "SRN" eto";
IBM RAB IRA G] " SNA" Ue
a “Bla " ae
WSSSO BRAG " SA" Aine
OO"; oe" AREAS IRAA " SERA " An
MBAR"; OS" SSA Re" BA" BR

ROBT

RAZ TUR IRN

ARGS AAA, EXAM CANIS FRE
IM NY, TALS AA A. MOER Ea ee ee
ARR AA) lid PRA EA BSCS, PILE: http://

www.coscoshipping.com/



= Be.









meee 02
5 aes Alll ors
Aaa 12
ae =p es 14
oat nee -5 a= R AaB Pp LSE 16
ios ase 5 S| gee Od aS tan) 20
lL ie eckar 4 mee) pr
UCase od Aes 30
scl [ou ea 42
gags Geel b= m2 ea 48
5S ME ease aS 56
3D 68
eeu aU 70
AERA FR 72
BEE Rin 75


















02 Message from Executives

Message from Executives

Ever since the great endeavor of China's reform and opening
up started forty years ago, the shipping industry in China has
entered a new phase. In 1978, COSCO SHIPPING's "BRITTA
KRUGER", China's first international oceangoing container
vessel, loaded with 162 containers, departed from Shanghai
Port to Australia, opening up China's first international
container liner route.

As the main force of China's shipping industry and a
major state-owned enterprise under the leadership of the
Communist Party of China, COSCO SHIPPING has always
been sharing the common destiny with the motherland since
reform and opening up and has closely linked its development
with the great rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. Giving full
play to the advantages of global network and resources, we
pursue the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and

shared development and strive to strengthen China's voice in
the international shipping market.

We adhere to the innovation-driven development strategy,
continuously strengthen management innovation, technological
innovation and innovative talent training, and strive to enhance
the Group's innovative capacity. We attach great importance to
work safety and customer service, pursue win-win cooperation
and promote industry prosperity with our partners, so as to
achieve the common, coordinated development of value
chains, the industry and regions. We respect nature, so we
devote to developing green shipping, practicing low carbon and
environmental protection, and protecting marine biodiversity in
order to build a beautiful China. We remain open and inclusive
in actively serving the country by continuously optimizing our
global business layout and contributing to the Belt and Road

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 03

Initiative(BRI) and China's maritime power strategy, to gain a
bigger say and more influence in the international arena. In
addition, we always bear in mind the people's growing needs
for a better life, and continue to help employees develop and
promote social harmony.

During the past forty soul-stirring years, we have stayed true
to our commitments and shared weal and woe with our
employees, writing a glorious chapter for China's shipping
industry. We, in an innovative, pioneering spirit, have created
No. 1s one after another, all the way from China's first,
Asia's first, to the world's first. We continue to build on past
achievements and fulfill our mission and responsibilities as
the shipping "national team" in building China into a strong
maritime country and contributing to the Belt and Road
Initiative with concrete actions.



: i>
Rdes Sc

cid:
’ ws

{

Review the past and we foresee the future. On the journey of
reform and opening up in the new era, COSCO SHIPPING, like
a “giant ship", will, guided by President Xi Jinping Thought on
Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, continue
to be a pioneer of deepening reform, a contributor to the Belt
and Road Initiative, a practitioner of global development, as
well as a promoter of the maritime power strategy. In the spirit
of innovation, hard work, resilience and resolve, we will brave
the wind and waves on our way towards a brighter, more
brilliant future.

Chairman of China COSCO
Shipping Corporation Limited

Xu Lirong

[2 Biss: »

a
.

Due 8,






04 AboutUs CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 05



About Us Organizational Structure

Company Profile
alll Headquartered in Shanghai, China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited is a super large state-owned enterprise (SOE) directly
under the management of Chinese central government. It was restructured from the former China Ocean Shipping (Group)
Company and the former China Shipping (Group) Company. Upholding the concept of "One Team, One Culture, One Goal, and One
Dream" (Four Ones), COSCO SHIPPING endeavors to become an outstanding enterprise that is more scaled-up, more globalized,
af of suppliers and ter career development platform for employees.
a et)



mo stitive, and more valuable, as well as a better practitioner of national initiatives, a better provider for customer service,

















at
PPING



-_
" ve.




: -) - ;
ce ee u

°°)





eve 4 sated lade ene capability and building a a
global company", the Group highlights the "6+1" industrial
clusters layout, namely, shipping, logistics, finance, equipment
manufacturing, shipping services, and social services industrial
clusters as well as "Internet Plus” business based on business
model innovation. This layout will help facilitate the integration
of shipping factors and build a world-class logistics service
provider.

It includes project logistics, specialized



and general cargo transportation,
freight forwarding, storage facilities,
multimodal transport, vessel agency,
tally, etc. Currently, the Group is
tapping into and fostering logistics
business with core advantages to
build China's best and a world-class

integrated logistics service provider.

Shipping industrial
cluster



’
Stercerrneris

The cluster comprises of container
shipping, dry bulk cargo shipping, oil
EME ERS 0) oll alee ocssccelarcialTalclerclater
terminal investment and operation, etc.
Currently, the Group is committed to
building the world's largest integrated
shipping company.




It includes ship chartering, shipping



insurance, supply chain finance,
logistics park investment, equity
investment and assets investment
mainly including the Belt and Road
infrastructure investment. Currently,
the Group is committed to building
an integrated shipping finance service

elroy olcle

Industrial fone




CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 07

Its mares peor covers a building,
cre ceinsedie Lure TaTPLcrot 1 La AeA Oo
cy and container CIAO reset
a ser Cciaithys the ee oi is committed —
10: sharpening its leading edge in terms
is core eee eas and market
RTRs equipment and ship

manufacturing and otherrelated fields.













Its business scope covers real estate



development, hotel management,
hospitals and schools, and other
social services. Currently, the Group
is developing this cluster into an
incubator for new industries and a

base for professional training.

=



* lic amare Cores) an UTA FSC

Sells elec as ship spare Pans

ye) coral ea conduction Pacey

management, and fuel and material —
erole] cited Currently, the Group is _
aimed at guaranteeing services for
the shipping industry, erecta
third-party customers and providing
Intciecxselayeci0]o/ece lume) mead tale ASeCcreliN}

shipping business.



"Internet Plus" businesses based
on business model innovation
will serve new industrial forms
with big data to realize integrated
application of Internet resources and
shipping elements. Currently, the
Group is carrying out "Internet Plus”
businesses to propel upgrading and
transformation of all our business

segments.




Global Routes & Ports

e Port
@ Ports of COSCO SHIPPING

— Routes of COSCO SHIPPING
10 AboutUs CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 = 11



raul eM a Aen es)













Indicator 2018 2017 Indicator 2018 2017
Total turnover of
Number of ships 1,285 ex : 3.1608 Pca
transportation
Dero NT=t 4a 102.19 86.35 Quantity of
tonnage of ships shipments AAS) es)
2.928 486 1.895 371 Moyne lial
Container fleet Pai Poe
transport volume
KASRch) 428 cic 422 ~or IVAW
Peele throughput of terminals 104.25
54.77 Cr 20.92 Gt The global sales v1) Ae
Tanker fleet ° y volume of bunker fuel
General cargo and 4.36 Mee} 4.61 175 ;
specialized cargo fleet Honors In 20 aR;
(er-TovecTan eae oa 9k
Global 51 List @ Xu Lirong, COSCO SHIPPING's Chairman, was awarded the title of
folate lnm eT) : pj F
rien of Reform by the CPC Central Committee and the State aA CRM CUI Ee
; Counc. Equivalent Unit. To facilitate
@ The Group was awarded the "Ship-Owner with the Most Gross ,
E : — : the calculation of the number
Registered Tonnes (GRT) on the Hong Kong Shipping Register of cartalnera, oxerbrinet
: (HKSR)", "Company that Flagged in the Most GRT During 2017 on ,
a containers are taken as a
. : HKSR", "Company Whose Ship Crossed the 115 Million GRT Mark standard amel are wswallly
Indicator 2018 2017 : on HKSR", and the "Excellent Port State Control 2017" awards by _ -
used to Indicate the ability
: : the Marine Department of the Hong Kong Special Administrative , :
Tah Zersiaaet yal ala) TAA) ay) 5 : of a ship to load containers,
employee assistance ’ 5 ich which is also an important
@ The Group was awarded the Best Global Performer Award by ,
a statistics and conversion
BES i=roINiclelon : :
5 unit for container and port
. COSCO SHIPPING was again rated as the highest level "good" in ieleaaia
: the assessment of fixed-point poverty alleviation by the central
: SOEs in 2018, becoming one of the 17 central SOEs that have
Indicator 2018 2017 F won this honor for two consecutive year.
Investment in targeted melas ey:

oo

poverty alleviation





Ne er le

seURN ORE




12. Corporate Governance

Corporate Governance

Risk Management

COSCO SHIPPING has developed unified risk management concepts: institutionalized management, standardized regulation,
platform-based operation, IT-based platform, systematized governance, and internationalized system. Based on a collaborative
sharing, comprehensive balancing and self-management working mechanism, we are actively promoting risk management and
related series of work, including system establishment, cultural advancement, team building, and capacity building, thus laying a
solid foundation for corporate governance. In December 2018, COSCO SHIPPING set up an audit department to further improve the
corporate governance structure, strengthen the leadership, organizational management and guidance of the internal audit work of
the Company, and better play the role of supervision and service of internal audit.





soeeees i Improving risk management structure



We gave full play to the "three lines of risk defense", deployed part-time risk control personnel in business
departments and sharing centers, and further strengthened the establishment of risk control organizations with
designated personnel for subsidiaries with frequent risk events and internal control defects. !



(pet I i Strengthening risk management system fooneceneeeeecet



The COSCO SHIPPING Regulations on Risk Management and Internal Control (2018) was introduced to
standardize the management procedures and guide the Group's directly-administrated units in sorting out the
business and management procedures of the headquarters and the grassroots units to ensure that the key
control was embedded in every link of the process.





Promoting risk management assessment





We carried out risk assessment and identified major risks in areas such as production and operation, strategic *,
management, and international operations in 2018. We formulated the COSCO SHIPPING Risk Management 4
Report 2018 and released the COSCO SHIPPING Major Risk Management Task Decomposition List 2018, i
clearly defining the main responsibility and tasks of risk management and continuing to follow up relevant

implementation. é





_eorrecrcmgaanencecennnaaasnanancecenansssaensreet geass + Improving risk control assessment mechanism



i: We revised the evaluation and assessment mechanism of risk control, clarified the assessment criteria and
requirements. We conducted risk management assessment, and promoted each directly-administrated unit to
integrate it into their performance evaluation index system.







Pe nenentnenenenne i Cultivating risk management culture i oe,



We organized the seminar to facilitate the exchanges and discussions on overseas risk prevention and S

control, early warning and monitoring of key indicators, project risk assessment and special improvement :

of risk control. We held internal risk control and quality management training sessions and carried out on-

site trainings focusing on issues such as the latest developments and instruments of risk control and quality i
management.

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 13

Integrity and Compliance

COSCO SHIPPING strictly abides by laws and regulations, promotes anti-corruption with zero tolerance, and incorporates the
requirements of fostering employees’ integrity and compliance within our management and operation. We have established
mechanisms on anti-commercial bribery and complaint letter and clarification, with the intent of building a clean, compliance-
centric environment and workforce with Integrity.

Defining Responsibilities Raising awareness

The Breakdown of Anti-corruption Construction Tasks 2018 was Training and education activities were
prepared, dividing the year-round work into 38 specific tasks and held to foster honesty and integrity,
clarifying the responsible departments and units; the Group's including education month campaign
responsibility letters for strict Party self-governance, including themed on "strictly observing disciplines
the main responsibility, the supervision responsibility and "one and helping tackle challenges and
post with functional duty and anti-corruption responsibility" were increase efficiency".

revised. The Party leaderships and the Secretaries of Committee for
Discipline Inspection of the Group and its directly-administrated
units signed 111 pieces of the three responsibility letters and 388

pieces of Letters of Commitment for Integrity.

Deepening Inspection

An inspection organization was established. The Group's Inspection Office
was set up under the Party Group and Discipline Inspection Group Working
Department as an organization to handle the day-to-day affairs of the
inspection working team of Party Group. Relevant inspection systems were
formulated and revised. The /mplementation Measures of Regulations of
CPC Inspection Work and other four basic inspection systems of the Party
Group were revised, and the Party Group Inspection Work Plan (2018-2022)
and Guidelines on Establishing an Inspecting System for Party Committees of

COSCO SHIPPING were formulated.

Party Building

COSCO SHIPPING has conscientiously implemented the central government's decisions and defined the role of Party organizations
in corporate governance. In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING focused on studying and implementing the guiding principles of the 19th CPC
National Congress and the important speeches given by General Secretary Xi Jinping, and actively organized activities such as the
"Welcome to the 19th CPC National Congress and build on the maritime dream" themed campaign and the Party consciousness-
themed education of Jiaxing Nanhu's "Setting sail for our dream", "Pillars of a power" briefing, "Liangjia River" reading and
sharing activities, etc. We comprehensively strengthened the leadership of the Party Group and Party committees at all levels on
ideological work, formulated detailed rules of the responsibility system for the implementation of the Party Group's ideological
work, and carefully sorted out the risk points in ideology. Guided by the goals of "Four Ones", we enhanced spiritual navigation to

systematically promote the integration of the Group's outstanding traditional cultures.




14 ~— Social Responsibility Management

Social Responsibility Management

COSCO SHIPPING actively supports the realization of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and has been pursuing the vision
of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared development. We have always fulfilled our economic, social and environmental
responsibilities during business operations, taken the expectations and demands of stakeholders seriously and made continuous
efforts to gain more trust from stakeholders and achieve sustainable development.

Social Responsibility Philosophy

We uphold the social responsibility philosophy of "create value and bridge dream", integrating the fulfillment of social
responsibilities into the Group's core values, and continue to promote social responsibility management for sustainable
development.

As acentral SOE that pioneered China's shipping industry and the world's largest shipping enterprise, COSCO SHIPPING carries on
the past and shoulders the future, keeping its original faith and being dedicated to building a "more scaled-up, more globalized,
more competitive, and more valuable" business model. Committed to providing smooth transport around the world, the Group
creates value for the nation, society, customers and employees, while bridging the dreams.

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 15

Stakeholders Communication and Engagement

COSCO SHIPPING maintains an honest and trustworthy relationship with customers, employees and partners and fulfills the
mission of maximizing the returns to shareholders, society and the environment. We continuously improve multi-tiered and
multi-directional channels of communication with customers, employees, communities and other stakeholders, improving the
communication mechanism based on mutual trust and commitment and promoting social responsibility management.

Stakeholder identification and communication

Stakeholders Core demands Communicatio d responses



Serving the implementation of national strategies Official document exchange

Fn Serving local economic and social development Information disclosure

Government Compliant operation Policy implementation

Fair competition Visits and exchange



To be an excellent leader in the world
shipping industry

A world-class shipping and logistics enterprise
must be built with international competitiveness,
brand influence, and high reputation among
customers, with a complete global business
chain; global resource allocation must be
optimized to serve global trade, spread
commercial civilization for global connectivity
and bring convenience and happiness to all
humans.

To be a considerate service provider for
global customers

Customer trust must be valued by practicing
corporate spirit; a leading integrated service
platform for global supply chains must be
built to provide global customers with more
advanced, higher-quality, and more efficient
industry-wide chain services and maximize
customer values.

To be the best supporter of employee
growth

Employees’ pursuit of self-value must be
respected by providing growth stages and
broad development platforms for business
and entrepreneurship, with a solid material
foundation and decent humanistic environment;
a good employer brand must be built to realize
the unification of "individual" and "corporate"
dreams.

To be a firm implementer of national
strategies

An active response to the Belt and Road
Initiative (BRI) must be made for connecting
China with the world and being a strategic
channel of economic globalization, thus
supporting the Chinese dream strongly.
There must be strict adherence to political
responsibility, economic responsibility as
well as the guarantee of value maintenance
& appreciation of state-owned assets.

To be an excellent practitioner of social
responsibility

In strong compliance with the law, long-
lasting development must be realized with
stronger capacity and better growth. Excellent
results must contribute to fulfilling social
responsibility and the global compact; due
care must be given to the global environment
and poverty-stricken areas with engaging in
international aid; a "good corporate citizen"
role must be achieved to promote coordinated
development of both the enterprise and
society.

Pursuing Sustainable Development

Coordination Bridging

Dreams

Opening



Fulfilling the Mission of Economic Globalization

COSCO SHIPPING’s social responsibility management model

A

Shareholders

S

Customers

2

Partners

—
a=

Employees

Communities

A

Environment









Good business performance

Good corporate governance

Risk control

Realization of corporate development strategy

Adequate information disclosure

Efficient products
Quality service

Guaranteed information security

Win-win cooperation

Industrial development through joined efforts

Guarantee of rights and interests
Good prospect for career development

Comfortable working environment

Engaging in philanthropy

Serving community development

Systematic environmental management

Supporting green industry development

Shareholders’ general meeting
Performance report
Road show

Communication with investors

Investigation of customers’
demand Official website

WeChat platform

Exchange and visit

Industry forum

Cultural construction
Workers’ Congress

Employee training and activities

Voluntary service
Public benefit activities

Targeted poverty alleviation

Environmental policies

Green investment




"A great vision, simple and pure, requires credible actions. Given the profound shifts in the international economic landscape, the
vision for a better world calls on countries to act with greater courage and actively champion openness and cooperation in order to
secure shared development.”

-xi Jinping



Interconnectivity and economic growth complement each other and both are critical in achieving high-quality
development. Against the backdrop of global economic integration, ship transport, the carrier of more than 90% of
the world's trade circulation, bears the important mission of unblocking the global shipping channels. As the world's
largest shipping company, COSCO SHIPPING takes the initiative to strengthen the interconnectivity between China
and the rest of the world, and provides a global transportation network to help establish international economic and
trade partnerships that is open and mutually beneficial, so as to jointly promote stable world economic growth and
constantly advance human society.



CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 17

Trade Connectivity-Captain Panda at the First China International Import Expo

The first China International Import Expo (hereinafter referred
to as "CIIE") was held in Shanghai, China from November 5 to
10, 2018. This is the world's first import-themed national-level
expo and represents China's concrete action to promote an
open world economy and support economic globalization.

As an international transportation service provider
recommended by the CIIE, COSCO SHIPPING, taking advantage
of the "maritime, land and air" coordinated, three-dimensional
transportation service and the end-to-end logistics supply
chain customization service, undertook the whole process

transportation task of exhibits from overseas to Shanghai. By
coordinating the shipping and air transportation business units
and setting up a special transportation group, COSCO SHIPPING
provided personalized logistics solutions to meet the needs
of customers in different regions such as Asia Pacific, Europe
and Latin America to ensure safe, efficient and timely delivery
of exhibits. During the CIIE, COSCO SHIPPING provided quality
transportation solutions and considerate services to nearly
100 exhibitors, 10 national pavilions and one international
organization from 25 countries and regions.

Case: New service experience of cross-border transportation

In order to better serve the needs of exhibitors, COSCO SHIPPING
Lines opened up a customized green channel for exhibits
transportation, and optimized the professional booking platform
(http://expo.lines.coscoshipping.com) to enhance service
experience of cross-border logistics and create greater value for
customers around the world.

The booking platform coordinates with customs, domestic and
overseas, online and offline businesses, and offers LCL, third-party
logistics information integration and real-time, dynamic tracking
and query functions to ensure efficient, smooth and reliable
logistics.

The professional booking platform of COSCO SHIPPING will
continue to be used after the CIIE and meet the diversified needs of
a wider range of customers.

Case: The "Fast" and "Furious" to race against time





The fast and efficient service is the basic requirement for COSCO SHIPPING's cross-border exhibit transportation. In order to guarantee
timely, fast, safe and economical delivery of exhibits, COSCO SHIPPING coordinated sea routes, air routes and land routes, and formulated
transportation schedules for exhibits from different regions according to routes and voyage conditions and arranged global exhibits
shipping accordingly.

Barbados, an island country in the Caribbean, made its debut in China and is one of the exhibitors who are far from China. For various
reasons, the exhibits scheduled to be shipped at the end of August were not ready until September 7. Under this circumstance, COSCO
SHIPPING's special transportation group responded quickly and an “air + sea" transportation plan was finally formulated after rounds

UES Sy eet ht

Prue Rai its cae
eee ah
of negotiation with the customers, which included taking air transport from Barbados to Panama Airport and then transporting to the

AAEL{Asia-Africa-Europe), the shortest route to Shanghai.

ee ly : =
1] FOR THE GOALS . ; r 2 : s When exhibits were airlifted from Barbados to Panama Airport, less than 48 hours were left before the ships set sail. COSCO SHIPPING

special logistics group began to race against time, coordinated and completed air customs clearance, delivery, maritime export customs
declaration, packing, lashing, exhibit entry, loading and other work, and safely transported the exhibits to the Panama Port a few hours
before departure, hitting the fastest local transport record.

Barbados exhibits transportation is just one example of exhibits transportation services for the CIIE. There are different stories behind each
batch of exhibits. We raced against time again and again with professional services, excellent speed and passion, ensuring high-quality
exhibits transportation. At CIIE, COSCO SHIPPING fully demonstrated its capability, confidence and commitment for "global shipping".




18 Promoting Interconnectivity to Link China with the World

In addition, COSCO SHIPPING Technology fulfilled the security mission of the CIIE with its technological advantages. During
the preparation of the CIIE, the company undertook the mission of building and implementing several security systems to help
Shanghai Public Security Bureau build an efficient, intelligent video security network. During the CIIE, the company projected
strong technical force at the Shanghal Public Security Bureau Command Center, Qingpu Field Frontline Command, and key links
such as the Bund to ensure the stable operation of the urban security system and a safe CIIE.



Based on the global routes network, COSCO SHIPPING designs an
electronic map showing the international land and maritime trade
channels under the framework of the BRI.

COSCO SHIPPING CIIE volunteer team













ZAIN AIAN

~~









f

a ,

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 19

Smooth Transport- Technological Innovation Contributes to the Opening of
Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao Bridge

The Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao Bridge (HZMB), a bridge of dream, unity, self-confidence, and rejuvenation, is constructed with
high-standard and plays an important role in the coordinated development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay
Area. In October 2018, the HZMB was officially opened to traffic after more than ten years of design and construction. During the
construction process, COSCO SHIPPING's subsidiaries have made contributions for the bridge to meet important indicators such
as quality and safety, ship navigation capability and traffic smoothness with leading shipping experience and scientific research
capabilities.

Case: Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao Bridge opened to traffic with intelligent support

The HZMB is an important bridge connecting the Mainland, Hong Kong and Macao and a link in the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao
Greater Bay Area. COSCO SHIPPING Kansai Paint Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Kansai") and COSCO SHIPPING
Technology used their respective professional advantages and resources to help build a strong, safe and smooth HZMB at a high level.

In order to extend the service life of the Bridge, COSCO SHIPPING Kansai provided steel structure anti-corrosion coating materials for its
Jiuzhou Section and developed a new generation of PTFE coating products with excellent weather resistance, corrosion resistance and
stain resistance. In terms of navigation safety of ships, COSCO SHIPPING Technology has carried out key technological research such as
bridge-immersed tunnel anti-collision, navigation safety assessment of non-navigable spans, and ship collision force and anti-collision
measures in non-navigable spans. To improve traffic convenience, COSCO SHIPPING Technology invented a bridge toll collection system
where the Hong Kong Autotoll is compatible with the ETC system in the same lane. The innovative system can identify license plates
from the Mainland, Hong Kong and Macao within 0.3 seconds, helping improve the efficiency of toll collection.

Cooperation-Promoting the Harmonious Global Partnership

By providing professional transportation services for major international events, COSCO SHIPPING actively contributes to the
establishment of a harmonious partnership between China and the rest of the world for open cooperation and interconnectivity,
demonstrating a new image of China's reform and opening up.



COSCO SHIPPING provided the high-tech electronic equipment,
such as ice screens, robots, and mobile device platforms, used
at the 2018 Pyeongchang Winter Olympics closing ceremony for
displaying the "Beijing 8 minutes", and proposed professional
logistics solutions for dangerous objects, such as batteries, to
guarantee the perfect presentation of the cultural elements and

unique charm of China in a new era.

“Captain Pandas" on behalf of China prepare to go on stage

COSCO SHIPPING Air Freight (Tianjin) Co., Ltd. undertook the
race horse transportation project of the Jakarta Asian Games
in Indonesia. A working group was set up to communicate
and negotiate with stakeholders such as customers, customs,
commodity inspection, security inspection, airport terminals,
aviation division, border inspection, and public security
authorities In advance to ensure a safe and comfortable journey

for horses during transportation.



COSCO SHIPPING transports race horses for the 2018 Asian Games
Ym Poverty Alleviation for a Brighter Future of

Focus

im People and Regional Development



"As long as we find the way, we won't worry over a distant journey. On the road to poverty alleviation, no family or individual live in
poverty will be left behind."

-Xi Jinping



Partner assistance and development-oriented poverty alleviation are important actions to promote coordinated,
synergized and common regional development. COSCO SHIPPING attaches great importance to poverty alleviation
and a leading group for poverty alleviation and aiding Tibet has been established. Adhering to targeted policies
with Joint efforts, the whole Group has been devoted great efforts to ending poverty. Over the years, the Group has
carried out targeted poverty alleviation work at Anhua County and Fuling County in Hunan Province, and Yongde
County in Yunnan Province, and provided partner assistance to Lhorong County and Riwogé County in Changdu
City, Tibet. In 2018, the Group systematically carried out poverty alleviation work ranging from official cultivation,
fund management, as well as supervision and management, promoted industry-based poverty alleviation in local

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 = 21



Formulating the next year's poverty alleviation

plan in the fourth quarter of the current year
Carefully

formulating
plans



Regular

Regularly assessing poverty alleviation self-assessment
performance to locate problems and make and review
adjustments





Improving management system, selecting
and appointing outstanding officials and .
refining division of labor cooperation Strengthening

organization and
leadership



Supervision and
guidance Strengthening on-site supervision,

safeguarding fund security, and
standardizing on-site processes



COSCO SHIPPING's multi-pronged poverty alleviation management

32 domestic

66 . and overseas
projects oo
implemented subsidiaries
rvB55.066 — implemented ve cwen
MLO aaeenenrtt oo
ee 45,443 employees
we Projects implemented participated in the "10-
a by the Group, our 17 Poverty Alleviation Day”
supporting oovert subsidiaries and COSCO fund-raising campaign in
pporting poverty SHIPPING Charity 2018, collecting RMB 3.2915
alleviation funds
Foundation million to support regional
from the Group, our tarzeted lleviat
subsidiaries and argeted poverty alleviation
projects

Poverty-stricken
counties and areas
lifted out of poverty

sn Onesie, df officials



Riwogé County, ea
Lhorong County and Officialssent byfourof. ee 2.
Anhua County, among oursubsidiariesandthe a
the five fixed-point Group to take temporary
Trained grassroots poverty
poverty alleviation positions or to be i fficials and
and targeted support stationed at villages alleviation officials an

technicians
counties, have passed

the national assessment



areas, and paid attention to the life and development of various groups of people in poverty-stricken areas, making COSCO SHIPPING

o new contributions to the promotion of local economic and social development and the improvement of people's
livelinood.

and get out of povert
Charity Foundation & poverty

Industry: Injecting Vitality to Regional Development

Industrial development drives sustainable development in poor areas. COSCO SHIPPING continues to assist Luozong Specialty
Product Development Company in Lhorong County, which helpes increase the income of farmers and herdsmen. We serve as
a matchmaker between Anhua County and China National Travel Service (HK) to launch the local tea and tourism integration
projects. We have compiled specialty product catalogues for targeted poverty alleviation areas, promoting sales of agricultural
products through multiple channels. In 2018, the Group directly purchased RMB 7.0363 million worth of agricultural products from
targeted poverty alleviation counties and helped sell RMB 1.2456 million worth of agricultural products.

Poverty alleviation story: COSCO SHIPPING always stands by the side of poverty-stricken households

Jiemuxi Village, located deeply in the Wuling Mountainous area at Yuanling County, Hunan Province, enjoys beautiful mountainous
and forest sceneries, far away from the outside world, but remains underdeveloped. Since 2010, COSCO SHIPPING has promoted the
transformation of traditional agriculture to the advantageous characteristic agriculture by highlighting the regional characteristics of the
village and focusing on agritourism, honey and tea industries.

In 2018, with the strong support of COSCO SHIPPING, the project of Jiemuxi Village Visitor Service Center was launched. After the
completion of the project, it is estimated that more than 100 jobs will be created through employment and entrepreneurship, and
villagers’ income and the village's collective tourism income will triple. The Group's poverty alleviation efforts in the mountainous areas
of Yuanling County delivered real benefits to the poverty-stricken village, showing the poverty alleviation effect of "helping a village,

driving the development of a town and influencing a county",

TRO a ) 4 cg ae)
Ds) als Te ee Tay |



"Now we have a service center, a place for visitors from afar to stay, which is a good thing for Yuanling County's tourism. It is indeed
conducive to the development of the beautiful Jiemuxi Village as well as the poverty elimination for villagers through tourism industry."

-Fu Yuansheng, owner of the Agritainment of Jiemuxi Village








22  ~Promoting Interconnectivity to Link China with the World

Education: Bringing Hope for Our Children

Poverty alleviation by supporting education enables people in poverty-stricken areas to gain self-development and self-reliance.
COSCO SHIPPING adheres to the principle of helping people increase confidence in their own ability to lift themselves out of
poverty and see that they can access the education they need to do so. In 2018, The Group invested RMB 17.23 million to support
education development, and improved the infrastructure of a number of schools, such as teaching buildings and canteens. We
helped develop education in poor areas through "COSCO SHIPPING Hope Class", "COSCO SHIPPING-Ganglameiduo" scholarship
and grant and "COSCO SHIPPING's Wishes" paired student aid program. In 2018, 372 pairs were made through the "COSCO
SHIPPING's Wishes" program, with RMB 663,400 of support funds invested.

"| am one of the first students of the "COSCO SHIPPING Hope Class". Ten years later, | returned to the place where my dreams set sail and became a
teacher. Without the three-year funding of COSCO SHIPPING, | wouldn't have the chance to complete high school and realize the dream of my life. |
will continue to pass on love and hope and help more children realize their dreams."



-Lin Jianzhi, a teacher of the Yongde Country First Middle School and former student of
COSCO SHIPPING Hope Class



Poverty alleviation story: Teaching for China and forging ahead with respect

COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation continues to send teachers to poverty-stricken areas such as Anhua County and Yuanling County,
Hunan Province, through its "Teaching for China" Volunteer Teaching Project, safeguarding the lifeline of rural education. Since the
projects are implemented, the Foundation has invested nearly RMB 17 million in college student recruitment, school infrastructure
construction and scholarships and grants for the "Teaching for China" project. Up to now, the project has recruited 125 outstanding
university graduates as volunteer teachers to carry out two-year teaching work in 23 schools in remote mountainous areas.



CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 23

Employment: Building a
Platform for the Youth

"A work for one family member lifts the whole family out
of poverty" is one of the most effective ways to promote
poverty alleviation. COSCO SHIPPING has strengthened
its labor assistance based on its own industrial layout. In
2018, the Group held a special COSCO SHIPPING job fair in
Lincang City, Yunnan Province, where four subsidiaries of the
Group provided more than 700 jobs. The newly established
COSCO SHIPPING Seafarer Management Co., Ltd recruited
ocean-going crew members in Yuanling County and Anhua
County, exempting training fees for all poor members.
COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation cooperated with
China Foundation for Poverty Alleviation in organizing two
e-commerce training programs for five counties, involving 58
local trainees.

Poverty alleviation story: Labor force transfer helps
Yongde people get rid of poverty and become better off

Since 2006, COSCO SHIPPING has helped train 178 seafarers
and 1,058 manufacturing workers in Yongde County. The giant
ocean-going ship, COSCO SHIPPING, carried Yongde villagers
out of the mountains, heading for the ocean and the world.
Some seafarers returned to their hometowns to start their own
businesses, and others led the villagers to get rid of poverty
and get rich, effectively helping poor households get rid of
poverty and increase incomes.

“For years, COSCO SHIPPING has been caring for the people
as well as boosting the economic and social development of
Yongde County, and promoted the poverty alleviation of our
county through labor transfer. By working in the Group, not
only can we overcome poverty and achieve prosperity, but also
learn a lot of knowledge that is impossible to access back in our



hometown, such as management expertise, ways of thinking
and analyzing problems, etc., which prepared us for starting
our own businesses."

-Li Zhenghua, former seafarer of COSCO SHIPPING, a villager
from Yongde County



Medical Service: Safeguarding
People's Health

Providing health security for people in poverty-stricken
areas Is an important measure to prevent them from illness-
resulted poverty or falling back to poverty because of
catching diseases. COSCO SHIPPING has improved the health
conditions of people in those areas by training doctors,
donating funds and medical equipment, and donating nursing
homes, etc. The Group vigorously promoted the development
of the traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) industry in Anhua
County, Hunan Province, and assisted in the construction of
two drinking water projects and one nursing home, which
is a demonstration of the county's old-age service facilities.
COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation launched a "Voyage -
Benevolence" TCM training program, and invited well-known
experts to give lectures to TCM clinicians in Yongde County,
Anhua County and Yuanling County, training nearly 100
clinicians and making great contributions to the healthcare
career in poor areas.

Poverty alleviation story: Helping the hearing-
impaired break the silence

In December 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation
donated RMB one million to jointly organize the
"Benevolent Project (COSCO SHIPPING) Hearing Aid Action"
for the hearing-impaired in Anhua County and Yuanling
County, Hunan Province and Yongde County, Yunnan
Province with the China Foundation for Disabled Persons.
Three designated service centers for the hearing-impaired
were set up here to provide assistance for no less than 750

‘>

people.

+


2
Q
o




26 = Innovation Stimulating the Momentum for Moving Forward

Building an Intelligent Shipping Ecosystem

In order to make China a country of innovators as proposed at the 19th CPC National Congress, COSCO SHIPPING focuses
on developing new forms of trade of shipping industry and aims to build an intelligent shipping ecosystem. Guaranteed by
infrastructure and basic equipment, we will leverage intelligent ships, intelligent services, intelligent logistics and intelligent
ports to help build a modern shipping service system with complete functions, high quality, high efficiency, convenience and

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 27

Intelligent ports

Intelligence is the key for future ports. We incorporate new
technology in the operation and business systems of ports
and build digital system with the Internet to make our ports
more intelligent.

competitiveness.

Intelligent shipping

By integrating modern information technology, artificial
intelligence and other cutting-edge technologies, we have
deepened the supply-side structural reform of the shipping
industry, improved the integrated offshore-onshore
communication network, and promoted the transformation
of intelligent ship achievements. The Group has actively
participated in a number of major national-level high-tech
scientific research projects of shipping, and carried out
key technology development and pilot applications in the
fields of ship intelligent sensing, automatic berthing and
departing, autonomous navigation, and intelligent equipment
maintenance, etc.



Intelligent logistics

The combination of digital technologies represented by the
Internet of Things (loT), cloud computing, etc. and mobile
internet enables customers to track the status of goods at any
time. Through the establishment of a demonstration platform,
we process and intensively analyze data collected from a large
number of shipping businesses and establish mathematical
models for analysis and trend prediction to help enterprises
make innovation, support rational decisions, and support the
Internet Plus transformation of traditional shipping logistics
enterprises, providing customers with quality logistics and
information services.

The Group's "Demonstration Project of Integration and
Innovation Application of Big Data Platform of Shipping
Industry Chain" was included in the list of pilot projects for the
development of big data industry in 2018 by the Ministry of
Industry and Information Technology.

The "Xing Guang Hua" semi-submersible ship is currently the largest semi-submersible ship in China and the second
largest in the world. It is also the world’s largest semi-submersible ship equipped with DP2 dynamic positioning system.

Case: The "Huke Plan” builds an information visualization platform for the supply chain

On March 16, 2018, the “Huke Plan" logistics information visualization project launched by COSCO SHIPPING Logistics was officially

put into operation. Through integrating the business information system, the management information system, the safety information
system and the loT equipment, and monitoring relevant indicators, the project realized 24-hour real-time dynamic visual monitoring

of logistics information along the entire supply chain. Driven by business and data and supported by advanced technology and loT
equipment, the project enhanced the visibility of the logistics supply chain and helped build a complete, safe logistics chain for

customers.

On December 17, 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics visualization project - “Huke Project" won the award of the" excellent intelligent

logistics information platform application" in the 2018 Excellent Cases of China Intelligent Logistics organized by China Communications

& Transportation Association.

Case: COSCO SHIPPING Ports joins hands with
Navis to build digital, intelligent and visual ports

COSCO SHIPPING Ports signed an agreement on software
cooperation with Navis, the world's leading provider of the
container terminal operating system (TOS). With the help
of Navis's advanced philosophy and rich experience of TOS
product development and project implementation, COSCO
SHIPPING Ports created the digital, intelligent and visual
ports within CSP (COSCO SHIPPING Ports), which promotes
information sharing between upstream and downstream
terminals and creates a good port industry ecosystem.

Intelligent services

In recent years, the shipping market has witnessed many
element changes, technology changes in particular. These
technological advances have brought customers with new
shipping experiences and provided new means for creating
customer values. Taking this opportunity, we continuously
optimized business content and processes with the help of
big data and the Internet to provide customers with more
intelligent and convenient services.

Case: Blockchain improves the quality of your
life by tracing products’ country of origin

Blockchain is immutable and trustable in nature, providing
absolutely authentic traceable data throughout the entire
process. In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Lines realized the
commercial application of blockchain technology in the
international maritime container shipping industry for the
first time in China.

Relying on the global information system and blockchain
technology, it provides traceable information of the
loading ports to ensure the traceability of Goodfarmer (an
agricultural products company in China)'s imported bananas
from Ecuador. The information is effectively shared with the
tracing platform of Chinese e-commerce giant JD.com, so
that consumers can confirm if the export location showed
on their phone is consistent with the origin information by
scanning the QR code on the package. This has also helped
global sourcing customers such as Goodfarmer to enhance :
their brand credibility and market expansion.

Pa





K— (9a) :
i
Oe. PL ant a , - - . Se]
28 = Innovation Stimulating the Momentum for Moving Forward = : i SS >, eee) Meth ’ 4 329 ~ =,

ee







a sP

Advancing Shipping Technology

Based on a group of key technological projects, COSCO SHIPPING makes its technological development serve national strategies
and takes shipping technologies to a higher level with new R&D capability. In 2018, the Group set up about 15 scientific research
projects on topics such as "intelligent shipping, intelligent manufacturing", and invested RMB 1.17 billion in science and technology
to deeply incorporate modern technology in every sector of shipping businesses.

Manufacturing-Internet Green ship Arctic The Maritime

integration technology navigation Silk Road



R&D and Application project Research on Key Sampling Research on safe maritime Integration and Demonstrative
of maritime cold chain container Device and Regulations of Ship navigation under extreme Application of Maritime Silk Road
logistics monitoring system Ballast Water Management conditions in the Arctic Transportation Environmental
based on the Beidou Navigation System and Key Technology Safety Guarantee Service System
Satellite System of Offshore Wind Power

Equipment Installation Ship
Using Hydraulic Lifting Device



COSCO SHIPPING launches scientific research projects to help achieve national strategies

Developing New
Business Model

The “Vladimir Russanov" completed the maiden shipment Although the shipping industry is not something new,

The Group scored high points in . . . . .
the evaluation of the National ee ee innovation should never stop. Guided by the principle of "ramping

Enterprise Technology Center Se Ae aL up, creating profit, and innovating", COSCO SHIPPING makes continuous efforts
and is suitable for ice navigation. Designed for ambient wo . . . . .
to optimize its business model, and strives to build a comprehensive global supply chain

temperatures of up to minus 52°C with ice breaking . . . :
; ’ service platform, big data research and development platform, project marketing platform and
capacity of 2.1 meters and known as the “Queen of the . . : a
Ice" e-commerce platform to develop new marketing and business model and enhance business competitiveness.



, the vessel can navigate freely ia ees

The Group and our subsidiaries
won one special award and
five first awards of the Science Case: Developing product templates guided by the transformations
and Technology Award of

China Navigation Society
Committed to transforming product into service and service into product and customer marketization, COSCO
SHIPPING Logistics highlights Innovation and continuously develops new business models, creating a series of
product templates for the Group. In terms of port logistics, the Zhanjiang Port and Huanghua Port model was further

NANTONG COSCO KHI SHIP promoted; tapping all the resources of the port, the Riznao Port model was developed; taking China Ocean Shipping

ENGINEERING CO., LTD.'s “smart & . > ~ Y - ee Agency Xiamen as the main body, the Xiamen port model was developed; and the product concept of an integrated
ship workshop” was rated 2 : > > logistics park was proposed for the first time in the Nantong Tonghai port project. These product templates have
as China's top ten intelligent [ ar . KS ~ . _ : . . , , ,
manufacturing demonstration , he “#] greatly improved the efficiency of the Group's business operation, and also provided customers with better service.

7 weeks s

COSCO SHIPPING has won many honors in technological innovation
Coordination

Coordinating Forces for
Sustainable Development

“We must ensure balance, stability and order among all internal elements of



nature and between human, human and society, and man and nature in order
to realize interdependency and coexistence. This is how we achieve dynamic
eguilibrium, coordinated development, moderate progress, unity in diversity,
and order in the ‘chaos’ ."

-Xi Jinping



SDGs:

ey Co Gi

7 ON

Ti ee







.S ee MTC ES ee
i a : “i

ee

SH
|














IPPING


32. Coordination Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development

Consolidating Safety Basis

COSCO SHIPPING adheres to the bottom line of work safety and goal of "eradicating major accidents with heavy responsibility,
avoiding serious accidents with relatively heavy responsibility and reducing general accidents". Guided by the "target-oriented"
and "problem-oriented" safety philosophy, we have comprehensively improved our safety management awareness and capacity
from the aspects of responsibility defining, source control, team management, education and training, technical support, and
information security, consolidating safety management responsibility and ensuring stable work safety.

@ Work system: Safety Education and Training Management System and Guidelines for Training of

fey f] Captains and Pilots’ Handling and Collision Avoidance Ability improvement

@ Work promotion: Develop the online seafarer safety education and training system; carry out special

Improving training for seafarers and pilots in batches; further promote the “special rectification of pilot teams and

safety capability

on-site work teams" activities and strengthen the management of the bridge resources and ensure safe



navigation
Work system: COSCO SHIPPING 's Safety Work Focuses in 2018, the Regulations on Work Safety q
Responsibilities, and the Management Rules on Safe Production Performance Assessment
Work promotion: Expand the scope of signing work safety responsibility agreements; carry out
performance appraisal of work safety process, increase the proportion of assessment; track the Defining safety
implementation of seafarer management reform, and ensure that ship safety management is carried responsibilities

out in a continuous and orderly manner

SY. $2 ® Work system: Guiding Opinions for Safety Management of Subcontractors

@ Work promotion: Continue to strengthen the cooperation with and the supervision of subcontractors,

GHD COnTTAetO safety and encourage directly affiliated companies to work with high-quality subcontractors that match their

management

industry status

COSCO SHIPPING safety management measures

RMB 74,608 0 100 % 100 %

Investment in Major accidents Anti-typhoon Anti-piracy
work safety success rate success rate



CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 33

Case: Information technology improves safety management capacity

COSCO SHIPPING develops and promotes the application of "Shipping Management Information Standardization
Platform", and has realized the unified information monitoring of sub-modules of ship safety management, maritime
management, machinery management, energy efficiency management, shipping insurance management and cost
management, thus improving the refinement level of ship safety management.

In November 2018, "Shipping Management Information Standardization Platform" was selected as a typical
production and operation case of informatization application among central SOEs cases by the SASAC.



Safety inspection Drift monitoring
e Realize timely and effective . : e Realize multi-dimensional
rectification and sharing of “4 LS maritime supervision mode,
inspected defects and hidden % safety a improve the pertinence and
dangers of ships a management Y effectiveness of safety supervision
. modules f work, and shore up safety

e Support work safety research
through big data analysis of defect

supervision loopholes

commonalities and systemic
shortcomings



Accident reporting

e Strengthen the reporting, investigation and handling of accidents, according to
the principle of finding out the cause of the accident, handling the responsible
personnel, implementing the corrective measures, and educating relevant personnel

Navigation-aid system safety management module functions

COSCO SHIPPING has earnestly implemented the work safety policy of "safety first, prevention first and comprehensive
management", strengthened the tracking and monitoring of ship safety, and enhanced the ability of safety risk identification, pre-

control and resolution.

Meteorological disaster prevention Piracy prevention

@ Keep track of severe weather such as ® Organize and carry out ship anti-piracy drill
: typhoons, heavy rains, floods, etc., i

and remind relevant units and ships ° Develop and use the ship anti-piracy module

in a timely manner for preparation in to achieve dynamic supervision of anti-piracy

advance to prevent possible safety monitoring, pirate activity information, ship

escort management and anti-piracy equipment

risks caused by severe weather

management










Hidden risks
investigation and management

Formulate the COSCO SHIPPING Safety Inspection Plan
2018 and organize three phases of safety inspection



Key ships tracking

é Track key ships such as passenger rolling

ships, training ships, large special cargo ships
including nickel ore ships, liquefied chemical
carriers, large ships and new ships, and a total
of 26,878 ships were tracked

Hold work safety accident analysis meetings and safety
management symposiums to report and analyze the
accident and carry out targeted rectification

COSCO SHIPPING safety risk control measures




34 Coordination Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development

Providing Quality Customer Services

Confronted with the homogeneity service competition In the
shipping industry and new customer demands caused by the
changes of the market environment, COSCO SHIPPING insists
on strengthening the development of the shipping business
sector and has proposed to transform product into service
and service into product and realize customer marketization.
Following the trend of the global market, we have refined
basic service processes and standards and enhanced the
ability to provide customized service so as to provide excellent
service experience for customers around the world.

os Improving service standards

By optimizing customer service processes, we have
strengthened communication with customers and formed
long-term relationships with customers. In 2018, COSCO
SHIPPING conducted a satisfaction survey on customers
around the world, issuing 2,462 questionnaires and collecting
2,008 valid responses. The customer satisfaction stood at
88.03%, an increase of 0.09 percent over the previous year.

i)
(O°) Opening feedback channels



® Formulate booking, boxing, bill of lading, invoice provision,
ship-to-class rate, transit service, arrival notification, window
service, and dispute resolution whole-process service standards
to improve fine service management

Clearing service blind spots

@ Open dedicated mailboxes, hotline, official WeChat account
and official website to strengthen customer service experience
communication and feedback

[Ss] Improving intelligent services



e@ Conduct an “Experience Officer" customer service tracking
survey to gain an in-depth understanding of customers’ needs
that are considered important by customers but ignored by the
Company

@ |n 2018, the Company conducted two telephone interviews and
an online survey of 65 Experience officers



COSCO SHIPPING's continuous efforts to improve service quality

@ Optimize the interaction function of e-commerce platform from
the customer perspective to provide more intelligent and more
convenient services

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018

Case: Ten years of sheer endeavor produces quality services

Aiming to become an integrated global logistics
supply chain service provider, COSCO SHIPPING
coordinates resources of each business segment to
provide professional logistics solutions that meet
the individualized needs of customers, which helped
improve Its competitive differentiation.

In 2006, Airbus officially decided to set up a final
assembly line in Binhai New Area, Tianjin. In order
to support the development of China's civil aviation
manufacturing industry, COSCO SHIPPING took the
initiative to undertake the long-distance transportation

mission of large aircraft parts. From 2008 to 2018, we





transported large components and parts with a total of
412 aircrafts, successfully completing the transportation

mission for Airbus.



Loading supervision site of Airbus

Being COSCO SHIPPING's first high-precision aviation material transportation project, the Airbus project requires
high safety standards. In order to meet those standards, COSCO SHIPPING has completed the R&D, design and
manufacturing of Airbus-specific platform boxes, rolling trailers, road transport vehicles, trial masses and lashing
tools, and has developed detailed operation procedures of barges, sea, land and air transportation, ensuring absolute
transportation and operation safety.

The success of the Airbus project demonstrates the hard power of COSCO SHIPPING's integrated logistics
transportation services. Taking it as a starting point, COSCO SHIPPING has provided more high-quality integrated
logistics supply chain services for high-precision instruments and equipment. Since 2011, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics
has cooperated with Harbin Hafei Airbus Composite Manufacturing Centre Co., Ltd. (hereinafter referred to as "Hafei
Airbus") with its project logistics service in undertaking the export of key equipment such as Hafei Airbus A350
elevators and rudders. The company realized the "going global" mission of "made-in-China" and "created-by-China"
products with zero accidents or complaints, as well as promoted the upgrading and transformation of the aviation
industry.




36 Coordination Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development

Harmonious Supply Chains

Always bearing in mind the big picture of sustainable development, COSCO SHIPPING pays attention to suppliers’ sustainable
performance while actively promoting its own responsible operations and practices. The Group advocates responsible
procurement. Suppliers’ performance in the fields of safety, environmental protection and labor are included in the strict access,
selection, assessment, and termination mechanisms. These measures are set to encourage suppliers to continuously improve their
CSR fulfillment ability, reduce supply chain risks, and create a more sustainable and competitive supply chain ecosystem.

Case: Strengthening suppliers’ CSR fulfillment management

COSCO SHIPPING Holdings has established a supplier management mechanism for pre-qualification, dynamic evaluation and
assessment, reward and punishment of suppliers. Suppliers are required to sign anti-corruption agreement and fill out social norms
compliance questionnaires. The company holds zero tolerance towards commercial fraud, violations, and safety and environmental
damages. These measures help monitor and regulate compliant operations and enhance suppliers’ CSR awareness.

In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING won the third place in the
fourth group in the ranking of the Central SOE Purchasing
Management of the State-owned Assets Supervision and
Administration Commission of the State Council, jumping
two places from the previous year.

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018

Boosting Industry Prosperity

The sustainable and healthy development of an
industry affects every company in the industry
chain. COSCO SHIPPING actively carries out industry
communication and cooperation and promotes
the establishment of mutually beneficial industrial
partnerships to boost a prosperous shipping Industry.

Industry exchanges and
cooperation

COSCO SHIPPING actively organizes and participates in
industry exchanges and cooperation to promote industry
information exchange and experience sharing, and jointly
create a better future with Industry partners.

Case: Deepening cooperation to create a new era of

carriers and ports

On January 17, 2019, COSCO SHIPPING held a seminar on port
and shipping cooperation themed “New Trade Pattern, New Era of
Carriers and Ports". Twenty port and shipping companies had in-
depth discussions on the new developments, new models and new
measures for future port and shipping cooperation and agreed that
the port and shipping industry in the new era should be driven by
new technologies, be based on service quality improvement and
aim at coordinated development.

In order to further grasp the development opportunities presented
by the new era and actively respond to new challenges, COSCO
SHIPPING and all parties involved jointly put forward the “New
Trade Pattern, New Era of Carriers and Ports: Boao Initiative" to
make the port and shipping industry more open, green and digital,
and boost sustainable development and competitiveness of the
industry.



Case: The World Shipping Summit meets the CIIE, offering more promises for openness and win-win cooperation



On November 6, 2018, COSCO SHIPING hosted the World Shipping Summit 2018 during the first China International Import Expo
(CIE), with nearly 1,000 participants from the shipping industries of dozens of countries and regions around the world. Focusing on
the theme of “New Pattern of World Trade, New Challenges of Logistics Transformation", world-renowned economists, leaders in port,
shipping logistics and other related industries explored new drivers for trade and the shipping industry and shared their thoughts on
major issues in the international shipping market, which strengthened industry information exchange and deepened cooperation.

On the same day, the shipping industry's first blockchain alliance, the Global Shipping Business Network (GSBN), was launched.
Leading port groups and liner companies will jointly develop digital industry standards, enhance industry collaboration, transform and
innovate in traditional industry processes based on this platform, so as to achieve a higher level of coordinated development of the
shipping industry.

2 ee ee ee, ae ae ee

Ore Tes pige sree AEs] dee OE ean eee ee eed
Se COSCO SHIPPING GROUP STRATEGIC CUSTOMERS AGREEMENTS SIGNING CEREMONY
AND WORLD SHIPPING SUMMIT RECEPTION DINNER

rope sth
Wd. ecto

7m

fT a



; DP World, Hutchison Port Holdings Limited (HPH), PSA International, Shanghai International Port Group (SIPG)., CMA CGM, COSCO




SHIPPING Lines, Evergreen Marine Corp., OOCL, Yangming Marine Transport Corp. and software solutions provider CargoSmart sign a
letter of intent to create a Blockchain Alliance of the shipping industry


38 Coordination Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 39



Cultivation of industry personnel Promoting Regional Development

Se ere ee ee aan Coordination is an effective way to avoid development imbalance and boost overall development. COSCO SHIPPING has actively

Meee ee eee nn eee a ee participated in the BRI, responded to and implemented national strategies such as the Yangtze River Delta Integration Plan and

Ne ee ee Meee the coordinated development of the Beijing-Tianjin-Hebei region so as to open up sea and land trade channels and promote

coordinated and balanced regional development.

In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING participated in the "Study on the
Construction of Young Officials Teams in the Central SOEs"

Dung Promoting domestic coordinated regional development
of the CPC Organization Department. It went to Shanghai,

Beijing and Guangzhou to conduct on-the-spot investigations Combined with the regional coordinated development policy of China, COSCO SHIPPING actively optimizes the domestic logistics

and conducted research, analysis and discussion on 170 transport network structure by constructing a new trade channel featuring smooth land and sea transport through railways and
typical cases of young officials. The project report was
completed in October; COSCO SHIPPING Ports and Navis

Jointly launched the Container Terminal Operating System

multi-modal transport, so as to promote regional economic development.

(TOS) Competence Center Plan, sharing Navis' Industry ee ee

experience through training and project implementation, and
rapidly developing a professional TOS implementation team As one of the earliest logistics enterprises having presence in the western China, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics has deepened its
for COSCO SHIPPING Ports. cooperation with the local government and its partners, set up several domestic and international multi-modal transport channels

Coating technology lab
Wie ee with Chengdu as its station of origin, and built up a freight network pattern that is closely connected with and supported by both



domestic and international lines. The company built the Chengdu-Europe Express Railway into the only China-EU railway with stable
supporting railway channels in China and transformed Chengdu into the hub for unimpeded trade of the western China and the Belt
and Road countries.

The “Chengdu-Europet" China Railway Express shortened the distance between Chengdu and the western China and even the world.
By speeding up the circulation of goods, the development vitality of the inland areas was stimulated and the foundation of economic
growth was consolidated. As of May 4, 2018, a total of 2,100 Chengdu-Europe express cargo trains were put into operation, and the
number of trains in operation in 2016 and 2017 ranked first in the country, making it the most stable and most efficient China Railway
Express with most trains in service.

In 2018, the People's Government of Chengdu signed a strategic cooperation agreement with COSCO SHIPPING to deepen cooperation
and speed up the building of Chengdu into a Pan-European and Pan-Asian gateway


CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 41



40 Coordination Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development

Promoting international coordinated regional development

In response to the BRI, COSCO SHIPPING continues to expand overseas shipping businesses and optimize its international shipping
network that covers the whole world to lay a foundation for COSCO SHIPPING's contribution to coordinated international regional
development.

Case: The Maritime Silk Road bridges China-Africa friendship

The friendship between COSCO SHIPPING and Africa dates back to 1967 when the Chinese-Tanzanian Joint Shipping Company was
established. During the following fifty-one years, COSCO SHIPPING made continuous efforts to build shipping routes connecting China
and Africa. We contributed our main container ships to build maritime transportation routes and inland transportation networks between
China and African countries and actively facilitated trade exchanges and the implementation of major infrastructure construction projects,

contributing to African regional economic growth and people's livelihood.

Serving Project Construction

1

Mombasa-Nairobi Railway construction



o

From 2014 to 2017, we have invested more than ten multi-
purpose heavy-lifting vessels to carry out 80% of the
construction materials transportation task of the Mombasa-
Nairobi Railway Project to realize the connectivity of six East
African countries

Gibe Ill Hydropower Plant construction



@)

3

From 2011 to 2016, we provided full-scale logistics services
for the equipment transportation project of the Gibe II|
hydropower plant in Ethiopia, and helped upgrade the
“East Africa Water Tower" to “East Africa Electric Tower" to
deliver clean energy to many African countries

South Africa De Aar Wind Power Plant construction



o

During 2015 to 2017, we transported 163 sets of towers
of South Africa's Wind Power Project from China to
South Africa to facilitate China's self-developed and
independently manufactured wind power equipment to
go global and alleviate electricity shortage in South Africa

Guinea Aluminum Ores project



@)

In September 2018, COSCO SHIPPING and Aluminum
Corporation of China Limited signed the cooperation
agreement on the whole-process logistics project of
Guinea, Africa, to carry out all-round cooperation including
bulk cargo transportation, wharf construction, barge
transportation and maritime transshipment, which will
help Aluminum resources of Africa go global

Shipping services help build a better future for Africa

Shipping Capacity Investment

COSCO SHIPPING Lines



As of the earlier November 2017, we have put
more than 95,000 TEU of fleet capacity into 14 Far
East-Africa services and 2 European-West African
services

COSCO SHIPPING Bulk





Shipping routes cover 18 African countries

Completing about 20 million tons of Africa-related
cargo transport in 2017

In 2018, we put 18 ships into China-Africa routes
service, a 13% increase year on year

COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers





With nearly 40 ships, over one million deadweight
tons, including 11 professional timber carriers,
13 multi-purpose heavy-lift vessels and several
chartered vessels were invested
In modern international shipping, protecting the marine ecology and promoting the
G re e ni D eve O p Mm e n t green shipping has become an important historical mission for all players in the industry
while practicing their CSR. Upholding the values to make voyages safer and seas cleaner,
COSCO SHIPPING has always adhered to the concept of sustainable development,

Cherishing the Earth and Regent fccairahrecclogcaleroronment.
Protecting Blue Seas and Skies

“We will devote more energy and take more concrete measures to advance



the building of an ecological civilization, accelerate efforts to develop
green production and ways of life, and work harder to tackle prominent
environmental problems. We will make the skies of our country more blue,
mountains more green, waters more clear and the environment more beautiful
so that the concept that lucid waters and lush mountains are invaluable assets
is better demonstrated on the great land of our country. " >

Xi Jinping a -





ee
PU TES |

Bas

=
~

. 5 -
st

“Se


44 Green Development Cherishing the Earth and Protecting Blue Seas and Skies

Green Shipping

Practices of respecting seas, protecting the marine ecology and advocating the green shipping are aimed at protecting and
developing the international shipping industry. COSCO SHIPPING implemented large-scale technical transformations of ship
equipment and carried out pollution prevention and control on ships and ports, thus saving energy and reducing emissions,
reducing pollutants generated by shipping, and avoiding the negative impact caused by ship oil on the marine ecology.

Energy saving and emission reduction

In accordance with relevant conventions, regulations and standards, we have formulated and issued the Regulations on
Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction Management to provide a basis for the Group and our subsidiaries to carry out
environmental protection. With the support of the information technology, COSCO SHIPPING has strengthened the monitoring
of energy use and environmental protection, and researched on the application and transfer of energy conservation and
environmental protection technologies, which has helped improve energy efficiency and reduce the generation of waste water,
waste gases and residues during shipping.

Case: Attaching equal importance to management and technology for more efficient energy saving
and emission reduction

To continuously improve the efficiency of energy saving and emission reduction, COSCO SHIPPING Holdings has constantly improved
the environmental and energy management mechanism and formulated a number of energy saving and emission reduction systems,
so as to realize the highest degree of control over the waiting time of ships and improve the energy efficiency of ships through
technological transformations.

Formulate the Energy Conservation and Improve the direct docking rate and
Emission Reduction Regulation, collect operational efficiency of ships at the
fuel consumption statistics and issue port to control of ship waiting time,
Fuel Management Weekly and Fuel and continuously compress ship time in

Lubricant Management Monthly on a
regular basis, and study, analyze and
evaluate energy performance data

port, thereby reducing oil consumption





Formulate the Operation Regulations for Renovate the bulb bows and propellers

Back-to-Shore Treatment of Oily Sewage of ten ships of 4,250 TEUs as well as the
and Shipboard Oil Pollution Emergency propellers of three ships of 10,000 TEUs
Plan to avoid the pollution of waste and four ships of 13,000 TEUs, which

reduced the wave-making resistance
during the voyage and contributed to
energy saving and emission reduction

According to the Low Sulphur IMO (International Maritime Organization) 2020 Regulation, a new 0.5% global sulphur cap on
fuel content shall be enforced from January 1, 2020 for all ships except for those equipped with exhaust gas cleaning systems.
The sulphur cap is aimed at promoting global green development and environmental improvement, as well as benefiting the
health and living quality of all human beings. As a shipping enterprise, we pay more attention to issues related to ship fuel and
technological transformation, and has made a comprehensive plan from perspectives of technology and management to ensure
our compliance with the Low Sulphur IMO 2020 Regulation.

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 45

Green ships

Adhering to green shipbuilding, we practice green development throughout the processes of ship design, building, operation and
dismantling, alming to build a green fleet in a green and low-carbon way.

The energy efficiency The dual-fuel electric The ship, equipped a new-
design index (EEDI) of propulsion system of type intelligent host, efficient
COSCO SHIPPING VIRGO the ship makes it one of propellers and energy-
has reached the IMO 2030 the most advanced and saving facilities, has reached
standard in advance, and environmentally friendly the third-stage IMO 2025
its emissions of nitrogen LNG ships in the world. standard in advance.
oxides have met the the
IMO NOx Tier Il standards. COSCO
wee? SHIPPING rrr

Cosco a , SCORPIO y CESI|

SHIPPING LIANYUNGANG __ LIAN GUI HU

VIRGO The ship has the green ship classification Thee, wert “

symbol and specific route binding “tess XIN HULYANG **

force calculation classification symbol,
which is in compliance with the Code
of Safe Practice for Cargo Stowage and
Securing (CSS CODE), the Hong Kong
International Convention, and the latest
Ballast Water Management Convention.
It has become a new-generation full-

The ship adopts excellent hull lines
and comprehensive energy-saving
equipment with independent
intellectual property rights, which

guarantees safe, environmentally
lifecycle “environmentally friendly"

. . friendly and economical operations.
super-large container ship.

COSCO SHIPPING creates a green fleet

Green ports

Fuels and electricity are the main energy sources for port businesses. By continuing to enhance investments in energy-saving and
emission-reduction technologies, actively promoting the mode powered by electricity instead of oil and using cleaner energy such
as electricity, we have reduced the pollutants generated by the Group, improved the efficiency of automated terminals and reduced
energy consumption continuously.

Zhangjiagang Win Hanverky Container Terminal Case: Taicang International Container Terminal
develops hybrid container transport vehicles makes outstanding achievements in energy saving
Zhangjiagang Win Hanverky Container Terminal is located Following the completion of the RTG “oil to electricity" project
on the south bank of the Yangtze River. The terminal has a and sewage water supply system transformation at the end of
stacking capacity of 43,668 TEUs and a throughput of one 2017, Taicang International Container Terminal, a subsidiary
million TEUs. In April 2018, it completed the acceptance of COSCO SHIPPING Ports, cut its diesel consumption by
inspection of the technological transformation project for approximately 221 tons in 2018 and realized continuous
the new-type hydropneumatics hybrid container transport decreases in carbon emissions. The sewage system was
vehicles, an upgrade of the diesel container transport connected to the municipal sewage pipeline network, through
vehicles. By comparing the new vehicles’ performance data which some recyclable sewage was used for flushing toilets
with those before the transformation and those powered by and irrigation after being recycled and purified. The water
diesel, the hybrid ones save about 12% of fuel consumption, consumption of the terminal in 2018 was 124,072 tons, down
thus promoting the sustainable development of the terminal. 29% compared to that of 2017.




46 Green Development Cherishing the Earth and Protecting Blue Seas and Skies

Protecting Biodiversity

The transfer of harmful aquatic creatures and pathogens in ship ballast water is regarded as one of the four major threats to the
ocean by Global Environment Facility. The Ballast Water Management Convention came into force in China from January 22, 2019.
Besides, the Group has followed institutional documents such as the Guidelines for Ship Ballast Water Management and the Ballast
Water Management Plan to prohibit any violation against the convention. By managing the operation, replacement, security check
and recording of ship ballast water, we aim to reduce the risk of introducing harmful aquatic creatures and pathogens from ballast
water and sediments of ships, and strive to reduce the negative impact of shipping on marine life.

Case: Coping with challenges and protecting marine life

Globally, blue whales face various risks caused by climate change, chemical pollution, sound pollution, overfishing, ships, fishing nets
and so on. In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Lines took the initiative to participate in the "Protecting Blue Whales and Blue Skies" program.
Along with strict cost management and operation time control in the liner industry, the company has stipulated stringent requirements
on container shipping companies involved in the program as a greater challenge. Besides, COSCO SHIPPING Lines has made further
researches on energy efficiency management of ships, updated plans related to sailing schedules, docking schedules and terminal
operations, and communicated with stakeholders proactively. Such efforts have been recognized and helped the company won
awards such as the golden award of Santa Barbara Channel Region and the silver award of San Francisco Bay Area, contributing largely
to the protection of marine life.



Captain Panda's Tips



Ship ballast water: To stabilize an unloaded ship, a certain amount of seawater should be pumped into
the bilge before setting sail, so as to enhance the ship's resistance against winds and waves, and when
the ship is loaded, the seawater is released. Such seawater is called the ballast water. Along with the
ballast water, a large number of flora and fauna are transported to different sea areas around the world.
Improper disposal of ballast water may cause the invasion of off-shore marine creatures in the local
waters and the proliferation and spread of exotic creatures, which will destroy the ecological balance of
local waters, damage fishery resources and affect public health.









Facilitating the Green Energy Strategy

The development of clean energy is the fulcrum for addressing climate change,
stimulating the adjustment of the energy structure as well as economic
transformation and development. As China accelerates the development of green
energy, COSCO SHIPPING endeavors to promote the implementation of the green
energy strategy of China and global sustainable development. By vigorously
developing the transportation of LNG and new energy resources, the Group strives to
become a leader of the domestic LNG transportation market, and an important player



in the international one. And by building ships capable of transporting wind power

equipment, we actively participate in installation and transportation tasks in offshore "Sea Challenger series" wind turbine installation

wind power projects, and promote the development of various types of clean energy. vessel of COSCO SHIPPING



CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 47

Case: COSCO SHIPPING transports LNG to China through the Arctic shippingroute, launching the revolution
for energy development and transportation in the Arctic

In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Energy launched the LNG Polar Silk Road |ce-breaking Tour to help ensure stable and green energy
transportation and improve the diversification of the energy structure. In July 2018, the first ice-breaking LNG carrier Vladimir Rusanov
for Yamal LNG Project set sail, becoming the first carrier that transports LNG from the Arctic to China. Compared to the traditional
route that crosses the Suez Canal, the new route saved about 20 days for LNG transportation. The carrier was successfully unloaded at
the LNG acceptance station of SINOPEC Jiangsu Rudong Petroleum Branch. Voyages along the new route saved fuel cost and carbon
dioxide emissions by 30% to 40% respectively, which is a real green voyage. It is also the first time that an LNG carrier reached the Far
East by way of the Bering Strait through the northeast waterway of the Arctic.

The successful arrival of the first LNG carrier, which marks the successful launch of the section of China-Russia energy cooperation
model project that transports LNG to China, has added to China's LNG sources and will largely enrich China's clean energy supply. As a
persistent energy transporter, COSCO SHIPPING Energy will continue to contribute to the optimization of China's energy structure and
provide strong support for China's green development.

Raising Environmental Protection Awareness

COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes green office, and encourages employees to print on both sides of the paper, recycle and
reuse, save electricity and conduct environmental procurement. We hold various environmental protection publicity and practice
activities such as training on environmental protection laws and regulations, knowledge contests and lectures, so as to help
employees develop environmental protection into a conscious behavior.

aa Land oy Ships Jp Ports



© e e

In 2018, the Environmental Protection In 2018, the activity themed with "Protecting On March 12, 2018, COSCO SHIPPING
Committee of Yantian International the Marine Environment Hand in Hand, Specialized Carriers launched the
Container Terminals organized employees Carrying Forward the Marine Civilization Heart “Running for Green" activity. In addition to
to actively participate in the "red bag to Heart" was launched on the YUAN HU! the offline running activity, the company
recycling" activity, environmental HAI ship sailing in the East China Sea on the also organized the online running activity
protection and public welfare flea market Earth Day. The activity made marine-themed where everyone runner can share their
activity themed "Green Action for Love" publicity in various forms, transmitted the running performance, photos taken
as well as the Earth Hour to enhance concept of ocean conservation, and helped along the route as well as thoughts
employees’ awareness of environmental spread marine civilization, which guided the about environmental protection. The
protection. Meanwhile, the company crew to take care of, protect and kindly treat running activity was aimed at motivating
promoted green office by encouraging the ocean starting from small things. more young people to pursue a healthy
employees to protect the environment in lifestyle and implement environmental
every detail of life, and lowering energy protection, contribute to a greener earth,
consumption and the amount of waste and become energetic both physically
generated by corporate operations. and psychologically.

COSCO SHIPPING subsidiaries hold all kinds of environmental protection
activities to enhance employees’ environmental protection awareness






/

co

In the new era, China will continue to open up to the outside world, share the fruits of
development with the world and strive to build a community with a shared future for
mankind. As a participant and promoter of China's economic globalization, COSCO
SHIPPING keeps optimizing global resource allocation, serving global trade and
disseminating commercial civilization with a broader horizon. The Group has been
building an important bridge between China and the world as well as strategic channels
for the Chinese economy to integrate into the world, in an effort to strengthen global

ties and boost economic development worldwide.


COSCO SHIPPING knows that only by engaging in global competition, building China's marine transportation channels and

logistics channels that are integrated into the global economy, optimizing its own global terminal, route, service layout and

enhancing international business capabilities can the Group consolidate China's control and support of core transport resources

and channels, better serve the implementation of national strategies, safeguard national security, and enhance the international

discourse power and international influence of China's shipping industry.

COSCO SHIPPING actively optimizes the layout of global
routes, improves the service quality of ship routes, and opens
up the lifeline of maritime transport between China and
the world. Currently, with Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea,
Australia, Southeast Asia, West Asia, North America, South
America, Europe, and Africa as radiation points, COSCO
SHIPPING has built up a global maritime transportation
network with more than 1,500 ship routes, covering major
regions of the world. In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING optimized
and reorganized some shipping routes, including removing
the Southeast Asia route and the Persian Gulf route, and
establishing the Pan-Indian Ocean route. The Group also
canceled the general cargo business unit, and successively
opened the African route, the Australia-New Zealand route
and the Pan-Pacific route. We thus further optimized the
mobilization of our transport capacity, and increased
transport capacity In new markets and new regions. At the
same time, we promoted the development of third-country
markets such as the Atlantic route, providing liner services
with multipurpose vessels between Europe and South
America, Europe and the Gulf Coast, Europe and West Africa
to further improve the Group's route layout.

More than countries and More than ports were covered COSCO SHIPPING provided funds for
regions were involved in the Group's by the Group's ocean routes terminals, including overseas
international operation terminals

COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes the distribution of global
terminals, and identifies suitable ports and terminals along
the Belt and Road as well as Important nodes of global trade
routes, and constantly enhances the control over terminal
assets. Efforts are made to improve the efficiency of terminal
operations and to enable port terminals, shipping logistics
and related businesses on the upstream and downstream of
the industrial chain for coordinated development. At present,
the Group's terminal network covers China's five coastal port
groups as well as Hong Kong and Taiwan Region, Southeast
Asia, Europe, the Mediterranean and the Middle East. In 2018,
COSCO SHIPPING continued to develop overseas projects,
such as the Terminales Portuarios Chancay S.A. (Chancay
Terminal) project in Peru, the CPT project in Singapore, etc.,
and introduced international advanced logistics management
suppliers to the Supply Chain Platform Park in Port of Nansha,
Guangzhou to extend businesses behind the port.

“Facing the future, COSCO SHIPPING will leverage its global network advantages and resource advantages to seek common

development with customers and partners around the world. We must take advantage of the trend and ride on the momentum to

play a bigger role in the international shipping market."

-Xu Lirong, Chairman of COSCO SHIPPING

The shipping industry plays a leading role in the implementation of the BRI, and it undertakes the historical mission of building

a maritime trade channel and expanding the logistics corridor connecting the "Belt" and the "Road". As the backbone of China's

shipping industry, COSCO SHIPPING insists on combining its own development with the national strategies, such as the BRI and the

strategies to build China into a maritime power and a transportation power, etc., so as to add new momentums to the sustainable

development of businesses, industries, countries and regions.

With an international vision, COSCO SHIPPING participates in the implementation of the BRI in a deep-going way. Through

deploying the "point, line and surface" layout, the Group accelerates the business expansion of ports, shipping and integrated

logistics in countries and regions along the route, and continues to improve the trade channels and transportation infrastructure
for those countries and regions. By the end of 2018, COSCO SHIPPING had invested RMB 55.8 billion in countries and regions along

the Belt and Road.

COSCO SHIPPING maintains the resolution and development
strategy to promote and improve the construction of global
container hub groups, and actively deploys port terminals
along the Belt and Road through the establishment of
diversified global terminal portfolio. Currently, the Group's has
carried out operations in 17 international ports in countries
and regions along the Belt and Road, including the Port of
Piraeus in Greece, the Port of Kumport in Istanbul, Turkey, the
Euromax Terminal Rotterdam in the Netherlands, the VADO
Terminal in Italy, the Marseille Fos Port in France, the Abu
Dhabi's Khalifa Port in the UAE, the PSA Singapore Terminals,
the Port of Busan in South Korea, the Port of Port Said in
Egypt, etc., covering Singapore, Belgium, the Netherlands,
Germany, Greece, Spain and other countries and regions.

Located in southeastern Greece, the Port of Piraeus is an
important hub of the Maritime Silk Road in the Mediterranean
in the 21st century. Thanks to efforts by COSCO SHIPPING for
nearly ten years, in 2018, the cargo handling capacity of the
Port of Piraeus has increased to 4.5 million TEUs from 685,000
TEUs a decade ago, and it has created 2,600 jobs for the local

area. The port is now 36th in the world rankings, rising from
the 93ra when it was taken over by COSCO SHIPPING.




COSCO SHIPPING is committed to connecting the five continents
and the three oceans. The Group continuously improves its
global route network with a well-established shipping route
network, thereby promoting the shared development of
countries and regions along the Belt and Road, and injecting
economic vitality into these countries and regions. COSCO
SHIPPING has opened several liner routes in Europe and
Asia. At present, the container marine routes along the Belt
and Road account for 58% of the total container routes of the
Group.

As the fourth maritime transportation route between China
and Europe, the "Polar Silk Road" is of great national strategic
significance. In 2018, 7 vessels of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized
Carriers completed 8 voyages on the Arctic route, transporting
626,000 RT of cargo; COSCO SHIPPING Energy's Yamal project
completed one voyage across the Arctic and transported 76,000
tons of liquefied natural gas. The project strives to make greater
contributions to the development of the "Polar Silk Road".

COSCO SHIPPING puts effort into solving the problem of land
transportation along the Belt and Road and enhancing its
comprehensive capability to serve the global supply chain.
The Group has increased its investment in Asia-Europe sea-
rail combined transport and Asia-Europe international line
business, and opened nearly 10 lines including Chongging
- Shenzhen line, Chengdu - Shenzhen line, Lianyungang -
Kazakhstan - Europe line and China - Russia international line.
The Group promotes the construction of the "China-Europe
Land-Sea Express Line" with the Port of Piraeus in Greece as a
hub in an effort to open up a new logistics channel between
China and Eastern Europe. In addition, the Group has opened
new ocean-going routes with the Port of Qinzhou and the
Port of Yangpu as the port of origin or transit port to support



The merchant ship Yong Sheng sails across ice fields in the Arctic

the construction of the New International Land-Sea Trade
Corridor, and turn the inland areas of China into a frontier
zone for opening up. The efforts will help develop an opening-
up pattern that links the land and the sea and boosts the east
and west regions share development through coordinated
efforts.

The "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line" Is built by COSCO
SHIPPING with the Port of Piraeus in Greece as the hub for the
integration of rail transport and maritime transport networks.
In 2018, a total of 50,000 TEUs of cargo were transport along
the "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line", up by 27% year on
year; the number of customers increased from 3 in 2016 to 635
in 2018, and the coverage of the express line expanded to 1,500
branches in 9 countries.



The China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line

On December 10, 2018, COSCO Shipping Ports and Abu Dhabi
Ports inaugurated the Abu Dhabi Terminals at Khalifa Port. The
Abu Dhabi Terminals (ADT), which has the largest container
freight station in the Middle East and the first semi-automated
cargo terminal in the region, is the first overseas greenfield
project held by COSCO SHIPPING Ports. The ADT connects
the Khalifa Port with the global network of COSCO SHIPPING,
becoming not only one of the largest ports in the Middle East
and the Indian subcontinent, but also a global shipping hub. The
successful operation of the ADT has injected new vitality into the
UAE. The Abu Dhabi Ports entered the top 25 largest container
ports of the world from its previous ranking of the 89m.

"The opening of the ADT is another major achievement of the long-
term economic cooperation between China and the United Arab
Emirates. The cooperation between Abu Dhabi Ports and COSCO
SHIPPING Ports will further strengthen the UAE's important role in
global trade, enhance the diversification of our economy, and also
help build the Belt and Road and expand trading links globally."

-Dr. Sultan Ahmed Al Jaber, Minister of State of the UAE and
Chairman of Abu Dhabi Ports



The Abu Dhabi Terminals

On December 29, the launching ceremony of the New
International Land-Sea Trade Corridor (ILSTC) and COSCO
SHIPPING "Hainan-ASEAN (Singapore)" Liner Route, co-hosted by
Hainan Provincial People's Government and COSCO SHIPPING,
was held at Xiaochantan Terminal owned by Hainan Harbor &
Shipping Holding Co., Ltd., Yangpu Economic Development Zone,
Hainan Province. The "Hainan-ASEAN (Singapore)" Liner Route
opens a direct passage through which goods from western China
can be shipped southward to Singapore via Port of Yangpu, as
well as a new channel for transferring cargo from China's coastal
ports to Southeast Asia via Yangpu. It declares that Port of Yangpu
in Hainan has turned to a new pivot of ILSTC and marks that
ILSTC, which takes Qingzhou in Guangxi Province as its gateway
and Yangpu in Hainan Province as its international hub, has
entered a new stage of development.

"The opening of the container route from Yangpu to Singapore
will bolster the confidence of international and Chinese shipping
companies in expanding the Hainan shipping market while injecting
vitality into the involvement of Hainan into ILSTC construction."

-Wang Lu, Vice Governor of Hainan Provincial People's
Government
COSCO SHIPPING ROSE departed from Qingdao, China on October 1, 2018, sailed across the Pacific and then into the Atlantic after In an effort to contribute to building China into a maritime Bower OSS iE C cont nues to strengthen technological

going through the Panama Canal, and reached three U.S. ports respectively. On December 3 local time, Chinese President Xi Jinping innovation, improve its ability to develop marine resources, and actively explore polar waters. In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING
and Panamanian President Juan Carlos Varela paid a visit to the New Panamax Locks on the Panama Canal. The two heads of state Specialized Carriers continued to carry out normalized and large-scale sails across the Arctic with 8 vessels, the most ever.
and their spouses then had a photo in front of the vessel with great delight. Since the first Chinese merchant ship, the Yong Sheng ship, sailed the Arctic in 2013, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers has

The Panama Canal is an important international waterway connecting the Pacific with the Atlantic. As one of the major clients of dispatched 15 ships to complete 22 voyages along the Arctic northeast channel.

the Canal, COSCO SHIPPING has nearly 300 cargo ships navigating through the Canal each year, with four to five ships on average
each week, including container ships, dry bulk carriers, and oil tankers. COSCO SHIPPING has provided container, bulk cargo and
oil product shipping service in Panama. Its Central American container shipping business headquarters is based in Panama, which
has turned the country into the most important container transit hub that links South America, North America, and the Caribbean
Region. In this way, COSCO SHIPPING has established a shipping network with Central America as the center that connects Far East,
Europe, North America and South America, making positive contributions to promoting world trade development and China-Panama
economic and trade cooperation. By the end of 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Lines had a total of nine trunk routes and direct routes

- one On March 15, 2018, the world's first deep-sea dynamic positioning crude oil transfer ship designed and built by Nantong COSCO
through the Panama Canal, greatly supporting Panama's position as a shipping hub for Central America and the Caribbean, and ime abcess - - ; SHIPYARD Co., Ltd./COSCO (Qidong) Offshore CO., Ltd for Norwegian ship owner Sealoading, was official named and delivered. The = —
driving the development of local industries such as trade, shipping, logistics and warehousing. a iz. Se TE = “— vessel provides powerful dynamic positioning for large tankers to be located in safe waters, and can conduct safe and quick STS \
———— = transfer operation from FPSO to conventional tankers. In addition, the ship is equipped with international cutting-edge technologies

such as variable speed diesel engine and DC power station system, and can significantly improve fuel economy and effectively reduce
emissions.

"| hope you can take full advantage of the Canal to continuously improve the logistic transportation and make greater contributions to

the development of China's shipping industry and world trade prosperity.”

-Xi Jinping

On January 25, 2018, the “Experiment 3" (Shi Yan 3) scientific expedition vessel, which was conducting the first China-Pakistan Indian
Ocean Joint Expedition along the Moklan Trench in the northern Indian Ocean, conducted a live broadcast of their expedition mission
on the earth sciences popularization platform initiated by the Xinhua.net via the "E Haitong" maritime satellite network developed by
China Shipping Telecom. The successful live broadcast was the platform's first live broadcast on the sea since its establishment. The
network was in good condition throughout the live broadcast. With real-time communication of texts, images, video data and remote
monitoring data related to scientific research and ship navigation, the "E Haitong" system installed in the "Experiment 3" guarantees
the success of the expedition, and further improves work efficiency and navigation safety.

Involving 34 domestic terminals and 9 foreign terminals along the Belt and Road

Covering 2 7 RUC
Re Toa tie eel iRa dh ALN: Yearly cumulative oil shipping volume and dry bulk shipping volume along the Belt and

Mitemecilaee |e <oN Tee LAL 9 uf major > I CoYe RE) 55.42 million tons and ov 69 million tons respectively

ports and inland stations by over 1 5 0
operating COSCO SHIPPING container

eld

Tiniesiectel 1 WA container lines, over 1 64 container ships, and 1 my Tw) million TEU container

ship capacity along the Belt and Road


<a =

Sharing

Making Joints Efforts to

Build a Better Future



“The prosperity of the country and the rejuvenation of the Chinese nation will
ultimately be reflected in the happiness of tens of thousands of families, and in
the continuous improvement of the lives of hundreds of millions of people. When
millions of Chinese people live happily, we can truly achieve national prosperity
and rejuvenation. *

-xXi Jinping



5 cag a
rT ee

OnE

St

a












Shared development is not only about the sharing of material wealth, but also about
the sharing of development rights and opportunities. Currently, China's economic
development is ahead of social development. As a responsible company, COSCO
SHIPPING is obliged to cooperate with internal and external stakeholders to invest
resources and create opportunities for the good life and long-term development of
employees and communities. We always adhere to win-win cooperation, and establish
good communication and cooperation with stakeholders, in an effort to contribute to a
harmonious community with a shared future for all and to deliver on the aspirations of
the people for a better life.

1 ai na
a 3
7 ON

4
» 4


s

58 Sharing Making Joints ee aB Tew

a= | nid , 4

Tan s with Emp!

COSCO SHIPPING is fully aware that e
the sense of belonging and happiness is




attach great importance to the pean Ke
helping them realize self-values and grow tc vy

.. rh
Staff management _ an
a am E.|
COSCO SHIPPING strictly abides by Lae or Law, and a
COSCO SHIPPING with a focus TRL in oa: ake
to continuously improve the talent manageme
COSCO SHIPPING issued the Opinions em eZ eerlcl Distr
employee remuneration management mechanism. a al nm
Personnel (Trail) and the Management he ee LOL 0
taking reference to the Management Regulations on the Rolo
appointing management eel and consolidating the managem
of staff on active duty is 137,193.

Selection and
R recruitment of
(Yaa eltoyy {2-55

@ Expand the coverage of the pilot proj
market-based selection and re

professional managers

@ Tap the potential of talents ;
talent transfers within the Group

@ Recruit employees in the transportation,
financial, logistics management and other
fields simultaneously to improve the quality
of recruitment F i

COSCO SHIPPING continuously optimizes the staff recruitment, evaluation and incentive hails
#* :

mechanism to promote the scientific, institutionalized and democratic management of Suto ocs =
a a] 7
, p Ve I
-~
:
Sd

’ .
ee ee) Son se ee ee ee, oy ee a ee ee ae cs



. LS ] AO] ——-f men 4

i et
t S pe

ae ha Sha rele
enior technician or senior tif

: : Technician or intermedium!
’ @) S @¢ @ 7 ‘al j es iP i Junior, intermedium, senior worker or junie
+f No title or techni



CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 61



60 Sharing Making Joints Efforts to Build a Better Future

Staff development

Case: Broadening talent development channels by launching the "Elite Program"

COSCO SHIPPING focuses on building key teams of staff, continuously optimizes the Group's staff training mechanism, and taps the In response to the Group's call, COSCO SHIPPING Lines cultivates existing talents with potential, broadens the channels for employee

potential of employees by expanding the career development channels of employees, and creating opportunities and platforms promotion and development, and improves the efficiency of internal staff distribution.

for them to play their roles.
In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Lines launched the “Elite Program" which focuses on the development of branch managers born after

1975. Through public selection within the company, COSCO SHIPPING Lines aims to select elites from domestic first-line branches
and overseas national companies to work at the headquarters, and back up as reserve management personnel. The program values
the opinions of the masses, and pays equal attention to the performance, capabilities and potential of employees. It is an important
Improving the ae Creating a reserve measure to broaden the channels for selecting and recruiting staff and enable management staff to gain first-line work experience.
i quality of senior Q young managers O of international

management talents









@ Actively select and send outstanding @ Implement the Guiding Opinions @ Continue to promote foreign language

management personnel to participate
in the One School, Five Academies
training courses of the Party School
of the CPC Central Committee and
Chinese Academy of Governance to

of the Party Committee of COSCO
SHIPPING on Selecting and Training
Excellent Young Officials, and provide
young officials with a platform for
growth through secondment

testing and quality ability assessment,
establish an overseas talent pool, and
enhance the innovative thinking and
international vision of talents through
overseas secondment and exchanges.

improve their ability to perform

In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING included
162 candidates in the overseas talent
pool

Key talent teams of COSCO SHIPPING

their duties
= Qingdao Ocean Shipping Mariners
Zs College





ao

Party School of China
TOLL Shipping



@ Customized courses: Study curriculum development
and design, staffing of teachers, performance tracking, etc.,
to meet the individual needs of trainees

@ Improved training effect: Develop innovative teaching
modes and training methods to improve the quality of
training. In 2018, the overall satisfaction rate of trainees
reached 94.14%, an increase of 3.43% year by year

Staged training system: Launch three stages of classes,
namely Qihang Class, Yuanhang Class and Linghang Class,
to meet the career development needs of employees at
different levels of positions

Demand-driven special training : Organize position-
based and special training programs, and analyze new
trends, rules and standards for the industry

Enriched online training platform: Enrich online
courses of the online learning management platform of

Happy life

COSCO SHIPPING pays attention to the happiness of our
employees, strives to create a harmonious working
environment for our employees, and helps balance their
work and life. For instance, we continually carry out various
activities, such as visits to employees on the New Year's
Day, during the Spring Festival and in hot summer days,
and providing financial ald for employees’ children. At the
same time, we have filed documents of model workers,
advanced employees and employees with difficulties, and
implemented visit plans in an effort to bring the care of the
Group to employees. In addition, we have carried out a variety
of cultural and sports activities to enrich the spiritual and
cultural life of our employees.

208,542

Employees visited and

COSCO SHIPPING pays close attention to the career
development and health of female employees. In 2018, the
Group organized training sessions for female management
staff to improve the career development of female employees.
At the same time, we promoted the establishment of
Mummy's Rooms for female employees with children,
aiming to provide them with a more comfortable and private
space in the workplace.Four Mummy's Rooms of COSCO
SHIPPING Lines, COSCO SHIPPING Energy, COSCO SHIPPING
Ports were rated as Shanghai four-star lactation room, and
COSCO SHIPPING Bulk's Mummy's Rooms was selected as
demonstration lactation room by the Guangdong Federation
of Trade Unions.

ruB43.57 milion

Total compassion fund

the Party paocr In 2018, the Party school eae 93 assisted issued)

courses and increased the total courses to 822, which are

taught in 1,184 hours
In 2018, COSCO

Efforts taken by COSCO SHIPPING to coordinate training resources, explore training SHIPPING visited and
needs and improve the quality of training assisted employees in
various forms
ingdao Ocean Shipping Mariners College was awarded the "Most Popular Seafarers Education and Training Institution" in the
Qing ppins ° p © 14,369 RMBL6.25 mitiion

Zhenghe Sailing Honor Roll 2017.In 2018, the Group's Party school organized a total of 70 training classes, involving a total of 4,758

Visited and assisted Total assistance fund

participants, a year-on-year increase of 6.4% and 7.7% respectively; among all those training classes, 59 were conducted face to employees in need issued
face and 11 were online, with 3,635 and 1,123 participants respectively. The training classes received a 98% satisfaction rate from

trainees.


62. Sharing Making Joints Efforts to Build a Better Future

Caring for the crew

Seafarers are the foundation and valuable resource for the development of the Group's shipping business. However, the special
working environment and the nature of their Job inevitably put pressure on the crew, both physically and mentally. Therefore,
COSCO SHIPPING attaches great importance to the health, development and well-being of the crew, actively enhancing their
professional ability and competence while creating a warm and comfortable working environment for them.

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 63

Jointly Creating the Future for the Community

Businesses and communities are stakeholders to each other. Only when both sides work together can we promote the
simultaneous Improvement of corporate value and community well-being. Therefore, COSCO SHIPPING takes the responsibility as
a corporate citizen, pays attention to the development needs of the communities where we do business, and actively integrates
into the local community, building a harmonious and productive relationship with them.

COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation



Health examination of crew: We have
established a health examination center
to provide regular health examinations for
the crew and form a crew health database

COSCO SHIPPING continues to carry
out the Yuanhang-Health program to
provide crew members with psychological
consultation and intervention services. We

have improved functions of the Yuanhang-
Souls Harbor platform, which is now able
to provide the crew with basic mental
health knowledge necessary for work and
life, and enhance their ability to cope with

Sailing health: We prepare medicine
for on-board crew according to their
health data, and provide round-the-clock
telemedicine consultation services

psychological problems independently

Guaranteeing physical health Caring for psychological health

Caring for the physical and psychological health of seafarers

Case: Intensive management and refined training

In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Seafarer Management Co., Ltd. promoted the establishment of the seafarer assignment mechanism and
carried out centralized training for crew members before boarding the ship and centralized shift changes. These measures ensured
that the company can accurately control the appointment of seafarers, improved the training results, and guaranteed the order and
safety on the ships. At the same time, the company could get to know the performance of the crew and improve the analysis of the
potential of crew members and their development, so that each crew member can enjoy a fair share of opportunities for growth.





COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation is a non-public offering,
non-profit charity foundation sponsored and established by
China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited in October 2005
with the approval from the State Council and the Chinese
Ministry of Civil Affairs (MOCA). Itis among the first batch of non-
public offering, non-profit charity foundations initiated by SOEs
in China. As an important charity platform, the Foundation is
committed to carrying forward the national spirit, devoting
COSCO SHIPPING's benevolence, supporting charitable causes,
and promoting social harmony and development. Adhering
to the concept of "sailing with love and spreading love all over
the world", the Foundation planed social responsibility projects
reasonably and created the "Yuan Hang" (Voyage) series of
charity brand projects to extensively carry out poverty alleviation
in Tibet, disaster relief, medical assistance and educational aid,
contributing to community development with its own resources
and expertise.

COSCO SHIPPING CHARITY FOUNDATIOI
MeydaAoc Xopnyos

te PL

fva, DeBpouaptog 2019

Greek Paralympic Memorial Medal

With the help of China Shipping (Greece) Agency Ltd., the
Foundation donated 100,000 euros directly to overseas social
institutions for the first time in 2018 to assist the participation
of Greek athletes with disabilities in the Beijing 2022 Winter
Paralympics. This Is laying the foundation for the establishment

of a responsible image of COSCO SHIPPING overseas.

Besides, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation raised RMB
66,917,500 of social donations, spent RMB 63,787,400 on charity
causes, and organized 78 charity projects in 2018. By the end
of the year, the Foundation had donated RMB 602 million and
organized more than 500 charity projects accumulatively.

In 2018, the Foundation was rated as the 4A social organization
among national social organizations by MOCA and has been
given full score in the Foundation Transparency Index (FTI) by the
China Foundation Center for six consecutive years. It means that
the Foundation has ascended to a higher level in standardized
operations and professional and targeted planning and
implementation of public welfare causes.



COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation was awarded the title of 4A social
organization


64 Sharing Making Joints Efforts to Build a Better Future




Yuan Hang « Jian Kang
(Voyage + Health)

Earnestly improving the traditional







Chinese medical level of the local area to
provide better health care far locals, and





caring for physical and mental health of





Yuan Hang « Lv Se
(Voyage + Green)










Yuan Hang « Jia Yuan
(Voyage » Home)

crew members and groups with special
occupations




Paying attention to research

Paying attention to and helping Yuan Hang Si Lu on ecological subjects and

the poor people in central and (Voyage « Silk Road) the implementation of related

western China build a beautiful projects focusing on ocean
homeland Highlighting overseas conservation

operations and practices
along the Belt and Road

Yuan Hang « Zhui Meng Yuan Hang « Zhen Zai

(Voyage « Dream Chasing) (Voyage « Disaster Relief)
Focusing on the allocation Caring for natural disaster
of resources such as basic relief around the globe

education facilities and
teachers

Charity projects launched by COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation

Promoting community development

COSCO SHIPPING encourages its subsidiaries to participate in community development projects and public welfare activities for

better understanding of the needs of local communities, so as to promote the high quality development of the local area.

Zz



Education Health and
support public welfare

Community
development



In the field of education, we provide We carry out health care assistance We participate in various community
volunteers, education funds as and free clinic activities to spread development activities, focus on the
well as educational facilities and health-related knowledge to the well-being of vulnerable groups in
equipment to enable students community, and provide better the community, and contribute to
of these areas to get access to medical services for underdeveloped community happiness and harmony
educational resources more easily. areas with poor access to medical by organizing and participating in

resources. cultural and sports activities, blood

donation and caring for autistic













children.

Public welfare campaigns conducted by subsidiaries of COSCO SHIPPING



CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 65

Maritime rescue

COSCO SHIPPING cherishes lives, and carries forward the spirit of humanitarianism. We actively cooperated others to complete 35
maritime search and rescue, and successfully rescued 7 people in 2018, fulfilling the responsibility of maritime rescue.

.
‘ ?

—



On April 9, 2018, “Ning An Cheng", a vessel under COSCO SHIPPING On December 17, 2018, MV. “Tian Fu" of COSCO SHIPPING Specialized
(Xiamen) Co., Ltd., rescued a Japanese sailboat named “CHARCO", which Carriers successfully rescued the British Golden Globe Race skipper, Susie
lost its power as its mainmast broke under severe sea conditions. The Goodall, who had been in distress for more than 50 hours in the South

14-hour rescue operation involving deviation for more than 100 nautical Pacific Ocean

miles was successfully completed

RMA

Menem




66 Sharing Making Joints Efforts to Build a Better Future

CSR Fulfillment Overseas

Social responsibility is a topic of common concern around the world. COSCO SHIPPING constantly participates in or organizes

CSR activities overseas, and actively integrates them into the development of local communities in an effort to gain the trust and

support of the local people, establish a responsible corporate image, and prosper with local communities.

Integrating into local
culture

COSCO SHIPPING West Asia Company always respects local
religion and customs, and has established good relationships
with local partners. In 2012-2018, the company served as
the chairman of the Chinese Business Council in UAE. Under
the leadership of the Chinese Embassy in the United Arab
Emirates, the company actively encouraged members of
the Chinese Business Council in UAE to abide by local laws
and regulation, practice social responsibility, respect local
customs, and actively interact with local businesses. On June
10, 2018, the company sent 16 volunteers to participate in a
three-day Ramadan charity event organized by the Council
at Al Rashidiya Zanzibar Mosque, where they gave supper to
participants of the event.

Serving as the executive vice president of the South Africa-
China Economic and Trade Association, COSCO Shipping
Africa Company has long been committed to a variety of social
responsibility practices, covering environmental protection,
wildlife protection and training. In 2018, the company
participated in the compilation, revision and publication of the
white paper on CSR fulfillment of Chinese-funded companies
in South Africa, and encouraged Chinese enterprises in South
Africa to actively participate in social responsibility practices.

Improving the medical
environment

In response to the Belt and Road Initiative, COSCO SHIPPING
Charity Foundation has launched the "Yuan Hang « Silk
Road" project module to expand the overseas public welfare
practices, with an investment of RMB 7.48 million since 2016.
The Foundation and the Red Cross Society of China jointly
launched the Belt and Road Fraternity Fund (B&R Fraternity
Fund), a project under the "Yuan Hang « Silk Road" module, to
cooperate on overseas humanitarian assistance projects. The
Foundation utilizes COSCO SHIPPING's logistics platform to
provide transportation services for donated materials and a
total of RMB 2,116,400 was invested to help improve the well-
being of community residents.

In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING provided transportation support for
large-scale multi-functional mobile medical facilities in conflict
areas of Syria and Iraq, as well as basic medical treatment,
surgery, health examination and medical transshipment
services to local residents. Since the foundation of the B&R
Fraternity Fund in February 2017, COSCO Shipping has
provided free transportation support for foreign medical aid
materials of the Red Cross Society of China for several times,
destined to the countries and regions along the Belt and Road

such as Syria, Afghanistan, Vietnam, Laos, and Cambodia.



In 2018, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation provided medical materials transportation services from China to Syria for the Red Cross Society of China.
Chen Zhu, Vice Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress and President of the Red Cross Society of China, and Xu Lirong,
Chairman of COSCO SHIPPING Group attended the departunerserémony

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 67

Supporting overseas aid

Taking the advantages of full-process logistics and transportation, COSCO SHIPPING provides professional transportation services
for China's foreign aid and humanitarian assistance projects, demonstrating great sense of responsibility.

May 2018 July 2018 November 2018
Through three months of efforts, COSCO SHIPPING Lines undertook the mission assigned Le He Ship of COSCO SHIPPING
COSCO SHIPPING Logistics completed by the municipal government of Shanghai to donate Specialized Carriers completed the
the transportation of the 21st batch vehicles to the sister cities in Peru, and completed task to transport container houses in

of supplementary materials for the
peacekeeping force stationed in
Democratic Republic of the Congo.

China's makeshift house aid program to
Burma. The houses will be used for the

comprehensive tracking of the whole process including
booking of the cabin, customs declaration, entry of

. . . . resettlement of homeless local residents
containers in the port, loading, unloading, customs

clearance and devanning.

Foreign aid and humanitarian assistance projects of COSCO SHIPPING in 2018

Better education

During the BRICS Business Council in 2018, COSCO SHIPPING participated in a charity auction luncheon hosted by the South Africa
Soong Ching Ling Foundation and made a donation. Funds raised through the auction will be used to build the Skill Training Center
for Orphans in South Africa to enrich local educational resources and help local vulnerable groups improve their professional skills
and competitiveness.

COSCO Shipping Lines Malaysia launched the "Malaysian Internship Program" to provide local students with internship
opportunities, help them to store the knowledge and skills needed for future work, and subsidize a number of local public schools
and orphanages to create a better learning and living environment for children. In July 2018, the Company invited 52 orphans from
the orphanages funded by COSCO Shipping to participate in the "Family Day" activities and spend a good time with the Company's

employees and family members.








68 Outlook 2019

Outlook 2019

Innovation:

COSCO SHIPPING will make constant efforts in technological
and business innovation. With a group of key scientific and
technological projects as the core, we will integrate the Group's
scientific and technological development into the national
strategy, and promote better application of the Internet and
big data into business and management. Adhering to the goal
of building a smart shipping ecosystem and with infrastructure
construction and basic supporting facilities as the guarantees,
we will endeavor to create intelligent ships, intelligent services,
intelligent logistics and intelligent ports, and to establish a
modern shipping service system with complete functions, high
quality, high efficiency, convenience and competitiveness.

Green Development:

Adhering to the concept of sustainable development, we will
strive to create a world-leading intelligent and green fleet, and
make constant efforts to protect the marine ecology and green
shipping. Through continuous research on the application
and transfer of new technologies for energy conservation
and environmental protection, we will continuously improve
the operational efficiency of automated terminals, pursue
better energy efficiency, and reduce waste water, waste
gases and waste residuals generated by voyages and ports.
We will exercise strict control over ship ballast water, and
protect marine biodiversity through cooperation with
international organizations. Also, we will promote green energy
development, help improve the marine ecological progress of
China, and contribute to a safer global marine ecology.

Coordination:

To guarantee the big picture of sustainable development,
COSCO SHIPPING will coordinate balanced development of
the Group itself and external stakeholders, the whole industry
as well as the whole society. In pursuit of differentiated
competition, we will Innovate in and optimize resource
allocation and services, improve customer service satisfaction
and experience, and thus lay the foundation for building
a world-class shipping company. Adhering to win-win
cooperation, we will maintain a harmonious relationship
with supply chain and industry partners, and strengthen
information sharing and talent training, so as to promote a
responsible supply chain and sustainable development of the
industry ecology. As a firm promoter of the national strategy
of coordinated regional development, we will contribute to
the balanced social development and promote common
development of the world in the tide of economic globalization.

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 69

With an open mindset, we will continue to optimize global
operations and create marine transportation and logistics
channels to provide strong support for China's integration into
the global economy, global connectivity and shared economic
development worldwide. Undertaking the mission of China's
economic globalization, COSCO SHIPPING will focus closely
on national strategies, such as the BRI and "maritime power"
by actively leveraging advantages of the global network
and resources, so as to improve the reputation of Chinese
enterprises with international operations. Through such
efforts, we strive to promote sustainable development of the
Group, the whole Industry, as well as regional and international
economic development.

Sharing:

We will continue to provide fair development rights and
opportunities for employees and the community, and share
development achievements with all stakeholders. Through
constant talent cultivation, we will provide employees with
smooth career development channels, care for employees’
health and happiness, and seek common development with
them. With a deep understanding of the community, we
will meet the needs of community development earnestly,
increase the investment in key community development areas
such as education, health care and public welfare, and thus
contribute to the well-being of all members of the community
and their future development. We will continue to implement
responsible practices in overseas operations, actively adapt to
the local life and culture, respect the needs for local community
development and willingness of all community members,
and thus promote common development with the global
community.

ait, allan




70 ~Expert Review

Expert Review

After reading China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited Sustainability Report 2018 (hereinafter referred to as the "Report")
carefully, | am excited and thrilled to find that COSCO SHIPPING is keeping pace with the times and sharing weal and woe with
the country. It is committed to fulfilling responsibilities, making innovations and hitting higher goals, opening up a new chapter of
sustainable development with new ideas and new prospects.

New requirements for the original aspiration of responsibility fulfillment. As socialism with Chinese characteristics has
entered a new era, new requirements have been put forward for CSR fulfillment. Enterprises must be rooted in the changes of the
times, focus on the needs of the people, aim higher, and shoulder greater responsibilities. As a large state-owned enterprise under
the direct administration of the central government, COSCO SHIPPING remains true to its original aspiration and keeps its mission
firmly in mind, and has closely linked its own development with the development of the shipping industry as well as the great
rejuvenation of the Chinese nation. Guided by the five development visions, namely innovation that stimulates the momentum for
moving forward, coordination that coordinates forces for sustainable development, green development that cherishes the earth
and protects blue seas and skies, opening up that sails on the maritime silk road, and sharing that makes joints efforts to build a
better future, the report properly demonstrates the implementation of the new vision for development.

New era for responsibility innovation that keeps up with the times. We saw the Group's efforts to promote the development
of China's clean energy from the LNG Polar Silk Road Ice-breaking Tour launched by COSCO SHIPPING Energy. From COSCHO
SHIPPING Ports’ building of the Abu Dhabi Terminals, we saw the Group's global vision and in-depth participation in the Belt and
Road Initiative. We also saw the Group's consideration for the development needs of and contributions to local communities from
the series of "Yuan Hang" projects of COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation... All these actions highlights the Group's eagerness
to Integrate corporate operations with the legal, economic, social and environmental responsibilities, and make continuous
contributions to the flourishing of China's shipping industry. Meanwhile, the report has disclosed the actions and achievements
the Company has made in intelligent shipping from the Intelligent Shipping, Intelligent Logistics, Intelligent Ports and Intelligent
Services sections, which fully reflects the Group's advanced sense of responsibility and leading responsibility actions.

New future for a journey of global responsibilities. As global CSR enters the era of SDGs, the report actively benchmarks against
the SDGs and provides practical plans as reference and inspiration for other companies to contribute to the SDGs with specific
cases. In addition, the two responsibility focuses on connectivity and poverty alleviation vividly show COSCO SHIPPING's actions to
facilitate the connectivity between China and the rest of the world and to help the country win the battle against poverty.

The report also actively creates new responsibility communication methods, and enhances the readability and interest by adopting
and matching diversified pictures and logical charts, fully demonstrating the sincerity to communicate with readers.

The new era calls for hard work to write a new chapter in the new journey. | hope that COSCO SHIPPING will continue to
uphold the harmonious integration of economic and social benefits and add an important stroke to the epic of the Chinese Nation
in the new era with extraordinary performance and outstanding responsibility fulfillment.

Secretary of ISO 26000 Stakeholder Global Network
Founder and Chief Expert of GoldenBee Think-tank

Yin Gefei

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018 71

2018 is the third year after the release of the Transforming Our World: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development (hereinafter
referred to as the "2030 Agenda"). Advocated and encouraged by the UN Global Compact, more and more companies are taking the
17 Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) proposed in the 2030 Agenda as the guide to proactively carry out social responsibility
management and practice so as to promote coordinated economic, social and environmental development. | am very pleased to
see that the world's largest shipping company has been adhering to the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, open and shared
development in a time of major adjustment and shift in the global landscape, and has made in-depth thinking and innovative
exploration of sustainable development. The report accurately and vividly demonstrates the inspiring innovative responsibility
practice of COSCO SHIPPING and sets an example for enterprises to contribute to the realization of SDGs.

Taking into account of the sustainability context and stakeholders’ expectations. In terms of the content, the report actively
responds to new trends and new requirements of international, domestic and industry sustainable development, as well as the
important topics and major events of interest to stakeholders. It depicts the overall picture of COSCO SHIPPING's responsibility
fulfillment and highlights industry characteristics and characteristics of the times. For instance, the report reviews the highlights of
COSCO SHIPPING in its involvement in the first China International Import Expo, the construction of the Hong Kong-Zhuhai-Macao
Bridge and other international events during the implementation of connectivity responsibilities in the form of responsibility
focuses. It also allows readers to fully recognize the active thinking of COSCO SHIPPING on how to use its professional expertise
and resource advantages to better fulfill its social responsibilities and serve economic and social development.

Compatibility between international standards with the SDGs. In terms of framework, the report systematically discloses
substantive issues from three dimensions of sustainable development context, management methods, practice and performance
according to the requirements of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) Standards. The disclosure of the management methods offers
a glimpse of the integration degree of COSCO SHIPPING's social responsibility concept and operation management and shows
its in-depth responsibility fulfillment. At the same time, COSCO SHIPPING refers to the 2030 Agenda to benchmark against the
SDGs, conducts exploration and practices in the areas that gives best play to its professional capabilities and resource advantages,
creates comprehensive economic, social and environmental values, and demonstrates its courage and capability to shoulder the
responsibility of sustainable development. By doing so, it sets an example and paradigm for other companies to fulfill their social
responsibilities and promote global sustainable development.

A combination of readability, credibility and communication. In terms of design, the report reasonably matches the contents with
vivid pictures, logical charts, cases, etc., which not only improves the credibility of the report, but also makes the it more attractive
and readable, making it easier for readers to understand the responsibility fulfillment practices of COSCO SHIPPING, and gradually
help the Company build influence in the global sustainable development discourse system so as to voice for itself.

On the whole, China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited Sustainability Report 2018 is a high-quality report with succinct content,
reasonable framework, clear description and beautiful design. | hope COSCO SHIPPING can sort out and summarize existing
management and practical experience, clearly identify areas of focus, formulate long-term, quantitative management objectives
and management mechanisms where performance is traceable and reviewable, promote targeted, high-level social responsibility
practices, and maximize value creation. | am looking forward to seeing that COSCO SHIPPING makes continuous innovation and
exploration in the field of sustainable development, sets an example in sustainability for the global shipping industry as a world-
class enterprise, voices for Chinese enterprises under the global sustainable development discourse system, and makes greater
contributions to the global sustainable development.

Deputy Director of the Employers Work Department of China Enterprise Confederation

Han Bin




72 ~~ GRI Content Index

GRI Content Index

Indicator Position



102-1 Name of the organization

Company Profile



102-2 Activities, brands, products, and services

Our Vision



102-3 Location of headquarters

Company Profile

Reporting practice

CHINA COSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED SUSTAINABILITY REPORT 2018

102-53 Contact point for questions regarding the report

73

Indicator Position

Reader Feedback



102-54 Claims of reporting in accordance with the GRI
standards

About this Report, GRI Content Index



102-55 GRI content index

GRI Content Index





102-4 Location of operations

Global Routes & Ports





102-5 Ownership and legal form

Company Profile



Management
Approach

103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;
103-2 The management approach and its components;
103-3 Evaluation of the management approach

CSR Focus |I-Poverty Alleviation for a Brighter
Future of People and Regional Development











Specific Topic

203-1 Infrastructure investments and services supported

CSR Focus |I-Poverty Alleviation for a Brighter
Future of People and Regional Development













Disclosures — CSR Focus |I-Poverty Alleviation for a Brighter
203-2 Significant indirect economic impacts Future of People and Regional Development
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;

Management 103-2 The management approach and its components; Integrity and Compliance

Approach 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach





102-6 Markets served Our Vision
Organizational 102-7 Scale of the organization Staff Management
profile
102-8 Information on employees and other workers Staff Management
102-9 Supply chain Harmonious Supply Chains
102-10 Significant changes to the organization and its Harmonious Supply Chains
supply chain
102-11 Precautionary Principle or approach Risk Management
102-12 External initiatives Industry Exchanges and Cooperation
102-13 Membership of associations Integrating into Local Culture
Strategy 102-14 Statement from senior decision-maker Message of Executives

Specific Topic

205-2 Communication and training about anti-corruption

Integrity and Compliance





Ethics and integrity

102-16 Values, principles, standards, and norms of
behavior

Company Profile, Integrity and
Compliance





102-17 Mechanisms for advice and concerns about ethics

Integrity and Compliance



Governance

102-18 Governance structure

Organizational Structure

Disclosures policies and procedures
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; | . |
Management . Energy Saving and Emission Reduction,
103-2 The management approach and its components; .
Approach Green Ships, Green Ports

103-3 Evaluation of the management approach





Stakeholder
engagement

102-40 List of stakeholder groups

Stakeholders Communication
and Engagement



102-42 Identifying and selecting stakeholders

Stakeholders Communication
and Engagement

Specific Topic

302-1 Energy consumption within the organization

Figures in 2018









102-43 Approach to stakeholder engagement

Stakeholders Communication
and Engagement



102-44 Key topics and concerns raised

Stakeholders Communication
and Engagement

Disclosures 302-5 Reductions in energy requirements of products Energy Saving and Emission
and services Reduction, Green Ships, Green Ports
03-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;
Management - : ee
103-2 The management approach and its components; Protecting Biodiversity
Approach

103-3 Evaluation of the management approach





Reporting practice



102-45 Entities included in the consolidated financial
statements

About this Report

Specific Topic

304-2 Significant impacts of activities, products, and

Protecting Biodiversity







102-46 Defining report content and topic Boundaries

About this Report



102-50 Reporting period

About this Report



Disclosures services on biodiversity
Management 103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; . .

. Harmonious Supply Chains
Approach 103-2 The management approach and its











102-52 Reporting cycle



About this Report










74

Indicator Position

GRI Content Index



Management
Approach

103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;
103-2 The management approach and its components;
103-3 Evaluation of the management approach

Staff Management



Specific Topic

401-2 Benefits provided to full-time employees that are not
provided to temporary or part-time employees

Staff Management, Happy Life,
Caring for the Crew















Disclosures
401-3 Parental leave Staff Management
Management oo ponaten of n me ope and Its ene Consolidating Safety Basis, Staff
Approach ve ie management approach ana t's componen's “2 Management, Caring for the Crew
Evaluation of the management approach
Management 103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;
Approach 103-2 The management approach and its components; Staff Development

103-3 Evaluation of the management approach



Specific Topic

404-2 Programs for upgrading employee skills and transition

Staff Development







Disclosures assistance programs
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary;
Management . - .
103-2 The management approach and its components; Harmonious Supply Chains
Approach



103-3 Evaluation of the management approach







Reader Feedback 75

Reader Feedback

We sincerely look forward to your comments and suggestions and will carefully read and analyze the feedback of every recipient of
this 2018 Sustainability Report of China COSCO Shipping Corporation Limited. Your comments and suggestions are an important
basis for the continuous improvement of our CSR management and practices. Please feel free to fillin the following form, detach it,
and send it to us by mail or fax. We sincerely welcome and appreciate your highly valued advice!

Your information



Name: Organization:

Telephone: E-mail:





1. Your overall evaluation of COSCO SHIPPING's social responsibility performance:

L] Very good (] Good LJ Fair L] Poor

2. Your overall evaluation of this report:

L] Very good (] Good LJ Fair L] Poor

3.What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in communication with stakeholders?
L] Very good (] Good LJ Fair L] Poor

4. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in fulfilling economic responsibility?
L] Very good (] Good LJ Fair L] Poor

5.What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in fulfilling environmental responsibility?
L] Very good (] Good LJ Fair L] Poor

6.What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in fulfilling social responsibility?

L] Very good (] Good LJ Fair L] Poor

7.Do you think the content and layout of this report help you read?

C1 YesL1 No

8.What other information to your concern is not disclosed in this report?



9.What are your comments and suggestions on COSCO SHIPPING's fulfillment of social responsibility and this report

as a whole?




S7NN = = =
cosco THa¥seRAARAA
SHIPPING CHINACOSCO SHIPPING CORPORATION LIMITED
NAS
Address: 687 Dongdaming Road,
Shanghai, China
Tel: 021-6596 6666
Fax: 021-6596 6886

&% The report is printed on environmentally friendly paper
Website: www.coscoshipping.com



_________cosco_csr_report_2019__________
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
  Sustainability Report
1

Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
 About this Report Introduction
This report is the fourth sustainability report issued by China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited for all stakeholders, and it discloses the opportunities and challenges encountered by the Group and the efforts to integrate our social responsibility into corporate management for sustainable development.
Reporting Period
The time frame for the activities mentioned in this report is from January 1, 2019 to December 31, 2019, though some content may extend beyond the stated time frame when necessary.
Reporting Scope
The information and content disclosed in this report cover China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited and its subsidiaries. Information and content that is only relevant to subsidiaries will be indicated.
Reporting Basis
Appellations
For better readability, "China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited" shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING", "we", and "the Group" in this report. "COSCO SHIPPING Lines Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Lines". "COSCO SHIPPING Energy Transportation Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Energy". "COSCO SHIPPING Bulk Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Bulk". "COSCO SHIPPING Logistics Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Logistics". "COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers". "COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry". "COSCO SHIPPING Ports Limited" shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Ports". "COSCO SHIPPING Technology Co., Ltd." shall be referred to as "COSCO SHIPPING Technology". "Shanghai Ship and Shipping Research Institute" shall be referred to as "SSSRI".
Access to this Report
This report is published in Chinese and English. For any ambiguity between the two versions, the Chinese version shall prevail. You can download an electronic version from our official website: http://www.coscoshipping.com/
Scan to know more about COSCO SHIPPING
This report is compiled in accordance with the GRI Sustainability Reporting Standards (GRI Standards) issued by Global Sustainability Standard Board (GSSB), GB/T 36001 Guidance on Social Responsibility Reporting , ISO 26000: Guidance on Social Responsibility (2010) , the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development of the United Nations.
Data Source
The information and data disclosed in this report is derived from internal documents and relevant statistical data from China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited.
 2
 Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
 Contents
Message from the Chairman 02 About Us 04 Corporate Governance 12 Sustainability Management 14
CSR Focus I - 18 Taking China further onto the Global Stage and
Making New Endeavors in a New Era
CSR Focus II - 22 Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life
to the Impoverished
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress 26 Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development 34 Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies 44 Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road 54 Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future 64
Outlook for 2020 74 Expert Insights 76 GRI Content Index 78 Reader Feedback 81
     01

 M
In
omentum for Continued Progress
n
e
s
n
s
o
a
v
g
a
e
fr
t
io
o
n
-
St
m
t
h
i
e
C
m
u
l
h
a
a
ti
i
rm
n
gM
Innovation - Stimulating Momen
As a Chinese poem writes: as the ship sails fast if it goes along with the current, a man will not lose the way as long as he stays on the right path, we will remain committed to high- quality development, carry forward the spirit of "forging ahead together", and continue to innovate with a global vision. We will further implement the sustainability vision of "linking the world, sharing the future" and explore a sustainable business model that meets the current development needs. Furthermore, we will rise to challenges in the global market, devote ourselves to the realization of the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and create a sustainable and bright future together with our stakeholders.
an
M
tu
e
ss
m
f
a
g
o
e
f
r
C
ro
o
n
m
t
tin
h
u
e
C
e
d
P
h
a
r
ir
o
g
m
re
a
s
s
    Message from the Chairman
iteration and commercialization as a platform-based enterprise, endeavoring to create a new ecosystem of smart shipping. Holding on to the industrial nature of the shipping industry, we strengthen the coordination and cooperation of industrial clusters and industrial chains for long-term development, and contribute to the coordinated development at the industrial, regional and national levels. Devoted to ecological conservation, we actively respond to the IMO (International Maritime Organization) 2020 Low Sulphur Regulation and other policies tightening emission reduction in the global shipping industry, promote the construction of a green shipping ecosystem, protect marine ecology, and help mitigate global climate change. In pursuit of win-win outcomes for all with an open and inclusive mind, we actively engage ourselves in globalization and the Belt and Road Initiative, facilitate global connectivity and unimpeded trade, and make further efforts to serve global socioeconomic development. We share development results with employees and communities, address their needs, and invest in employee development, targeted poverty alleviation and overseas CSR practices, contributing our due part to the delivery of a better life.
Seventy years ago, M.V. Hai Liao forced its way through heavy blockades and eventually returned to the port of Dalian, becoming the first commercial vessel to fly the Five-starred Red Flag, the national flag of the People's Republic of China (the PRC), and opening a new chapter for China's shipping industry. In the past seven decades, generations of seafarers have made strenuous efforts, weathered the storm and witnessed China's shipping industry grow from scratch and gradually build its strengths and resilience along with national development, writing a glorious chapter in the global shipping history.
2019 was an extraordinary year for COSCO SHIPPING. We celebrated the 70th anniversary of the founding of the PRC and the 3rd anniversary of the Group's reform and restructuring. In the past 1,100-more days, we have shouldered the mission of serving "world trade prosperity", deepened reforms and improved performance, and braved the global downturn. Working hand in hand with our partners in a humbled manner, we sustained stable growth in terms of scale, and made considerable progress in profitability, resistance to cyclical risks, and development worldwide. Yet, 2019 was also a year of ups and downs. Facing the complex environment of
increasing downside risks of the world economy and intensifying competition in the global shipping market, COSCO SHIPPING kept ahead of the curve and made progress in changes. In order to "stay ahead of the market, the changes and the times", we strengthened industrial chain coordination and integration, conducted win-win cooperation, and deepened reform and innovation, striving to build a more dynamic and resilient enterprise that leads a new industry ecosystem featuring higher quality and sustainable development. By doing so, we endeavor to create value for and bridge the dreams of the country, society, customers and employees.
The shipping industry is highly internationalized. COSCO SHIPPING, with its global vision, international network and resource advantages, has been practicing the concept of "Innovative, Coordinated, Green, Open and Shared Development" and is well-prepared for any sustainability opportunities and challenges. We work hard to improve the brand image, and contribute China's wisdom to the development of the global shipping industry. We embrace the fourth industrial revolution, continue to pursue innovation-driven development, promote the integration of innovation resources and speed up the technology
Chairman of China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited
0
02
20
Xu Lirong
03
3

 A
A
Ab
bo
o
u
ut
tU
U
b
s
sA
b
o
ou
ut
t
U
U
s
s
    About Us
Overview
Headquartered in Shanghai, China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited (COSCO SHIPPING) is the merged entity of China Ocean Shipping (Group) Company (COSCO) and China Shipping (Group) Company (China Shipping), and an extremely large state-owned enterprise (SOE) directly under the management of the Chinese central government. Upholding the concept of "One Team, One Culture, One Goal, and One Dream", COSCO SHIPPING endeavors to become an outstanding enterprise that is "larger, more globalized, more competitive, and more valuable". It is committed to becoming a better practitioner of international trade, a better service provider for customers, a better partner of suppliers, and a better platform for employee growth.
Party Committee
Board of Directors Management
Board of Supervisors
                        One Team
Building an excellent team that keeps forging ahead
One Culture
Creating a culture of common destiny
One Goal
Becoming a world- class enterprise
One Dream
Achieving excellence
   04
05
Research Center
Human Resources Center
Media Center
Financial Services Center
Procurement Center
Audit Center
Affiliated centers of the Headquarters
Organizational Structure
Trade Union
Political Affairs Division
Audit Division/Inspection Team of Party Committee
Technology & Information Management Division
Legal Affairs and Risk Management Division
Public Relations Division
Capital Management & Operation Division
Human Resources Division Finance and Accounting Division
Safety Supervision Division (Emergency Response Center)
Operating Management Division
Strategy & Corporate Management Division
Executive Division (Beijing)
Office of BoD/Executive Division
Discipline Inspection & Supervision Division

About Us
About Us
  Our Vision
The vision of COSCO SHIPPING is to help fulfill the mission of China's economic globalization and to integrate superior resources to build a world- class logistics service provider featuring multiple industrial clusters with shipping, integrated logistics and related financial services as the core business.
Focusing on four strategic dimensions of "Scale Growth, Profitability, Anti-cyclical Capability and a Global Company", the Group highlights the "6+1" industrial clusters layout. The six industrial clusters include shipping, logistics, finance, equipment manufacturing, shipping services, and social services. The 1 means "Internet Plus" business based on business model innovation. This layout will help facilitate the integration of shipping factors and build a world-class logistics service and supply chain service provider.
Logistics Industrial Cluster
The cluster is comprised of project logistics, cargo agency, storage facilities, intermodal transport, shipping agency. Positioned as a leading global third-party integrated logistics service provider, it will be a preferred global logistics partner of Chinese enterprises as they enter the global market.
Shipping Industrial Cluster
The cluster is comprised of container shipping, terminal investment and operation, tanker shipping, LNG shipping, dry bulk shipping and passenger liner services. As one of the core industrial clusters, it will further cement the position of COSCO SHIPPING as the No. 1 integrated shipping company in the world.
Equipment Manufacturing Industrial Cluster
The cluster is comprised of shipbuilding, offshore equipment manufacturing, ship repairing, and container manufacturing. As a key industrial cluster, it will further sharpen its advantages in core technologies and market share in offshore equipment manufacturing, shipbuilding and other related fields.
Shipping Services Cluster
The cluster is comprised of ship management, crew management, ship spare parts procurement, communication & navigation technology management, ship fuel and materials supply. It will provide a strong guarantee for the major business segments of the Group.
                                                                 06
07
Shipping Finance Industrial Cluster
The cluster is comprised of ship chartering, shipping insurance, supply chain finance, logistics park investment, equity investment, and asset investment (especially infrastructure investment along the Belt and Road). Its objective is to become the No. 1 shipping finance and logistics finance industrial cluster in China and gradually take the leading position in the world.
Social Services Industrial Cluster
The cluster is comprised of real estate development, hotel management, hospitals, universities and other social services. It is both an incubator for new industries and a base for professional training.
"Internet Plus" Business
Based on business model innovation, the "Internet Plus" business will serve new business forms with high-quality big data, facilitate the transformation and upgrade of different business segments, and achieve the integrated application of Internet resources and shipping factors.

 About Us
About Us
     Global Routes & Ports
Port
Ports of COSCO SHIPPING Routes of COSCO SHIPPING
0
0
8
80
09
9

 About Us
Figures in 2019
Business Capability
员工发展与关怀
About Us
RMB 61.62 million 2017
RMB 39.00 million
Captain Panda's Tips:
Indicator
Number of ships
Deadweight tonnage(DWT) of ships
Container fleet Dry bulk fleet
Tanker fleet
General cargo and specialized cargo fleet
Global container terminals
Indicator
Investment in employee assistance
2019
RMB 61.37 million
2018
RMB 67.80 million 2018
RMB 55.07 million
2017
Indicator
Total turnover of transportation
Quantity of shipments
Container transport volume
Container throughput of terminals
Global sales volume of bunker fuel
2019
3.58 trillion tons of sea miles 1.31 billion tons 37.36million TEU
133.95 million TEU 29 million tons
2017
container and port throughput.
10
11
2019
1,315 ships
ranking No.1 in the world
104.56 million DWT ranking No.1 in the world
3.08 million TEU with 508 vessels ranking the third in the world
39.84 million DWT with 411 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
25.40 million DWT with 202 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
4.46 million DWT with175 ships ranking No.1 in the world
53
2018
1,285 ships
ranking No.1 in the world
102.19 million DWT ranking No.1 in the world
2.93 million TEU with 486 vessels ranking the third in the world
39.85million DWT with 428 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
24.77 million DWT with 193 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
4.36 million DWT with175 ships ranking No.1 in the world
51
2018
3.16 trillion tons of sea miles 1.20billion tons
32.14 million TEU
126.28 million TEU 26 million tons
2017
1,123 ships
ranking No.1 in the world
86.35 million DWT ranking No.1 in the world
1.90 million TEU with 371 vessels ranking the fourth in the world
38.11 million DWT with 422 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
20.92 million DWT with 155 vessels ranking No.1 in the world
4.61 million DWT with175 ships ranking No.1 in the world
55
2.91 trillion tons of sea miles 1.08 billion tons
26.44 million TEU
104.25 million TEU 27.83 million tons
Employee Development and Care
Business Performance
standard and are usually used to indicate the ability of a ship to load containers, which is also an important statistic and conversion unit for
Philanthropy 公员工益慈发善展与关怀
Indicator
COSCO SHIPPING ranked the 279th in the Fortune Global 500 list, up 56 places from the previous year.
Chairman Xu Lirong received the President's Award at the BIMCO Conference and Lifetime Achievement Award at Lloyd's List Asia Pacific Awards 2019.
COSCO SHIPPING Ports Limited was awarded Best Port Operator 2018 by International Business Magazine.
CargoSmart of OOCL received the Lloyd's List 2019 "Excellence in Supply Chain Management" Asia Pacific Award.
COSCO SHIPPING's Cloud Computing Management Platform was awarded the Shanghai Cloud Computing Application Demonstration Project 2019.
COSCO SHIPPING Ports Limited was awarded "Best in ESG Awards - Middle Market Capitalization", "Best in Reporting Awards - Middle Market Capitalization" and "ESG Report of the Year Awards - Middle Market Capitalization" at the BDO ESG Awards 2019.
COSCO SHIPPING was nominated for the "Top 100 Enterprises for China Brand Development (Enterprise) Index" initiated and compiled by the People's Daily.
Investment in targeted poverty alleviation
2019
RMB 69.33 million Honors in 2019
TEU refers to Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit. To facilitate the calculation of the number of containers, twenty-foot containers are taken as a

Corporate Governance
Corporate Governance
  Corporate Governance Risk Management
According to Review of Maritime Transport 2019 published by United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), due to external factors such as trade policy conflicts, the global merchandise trade has slowed down, making it harder for the global shipping industry. Facing the complex and changing development situation, COSCO SHIPPING continues to consolidate and improve its institutional, cultural, human resources bases and capabilities for risk management, thus laying a solid foundation for corporate governance.
Business Integrity and Compliance
COSCO SHIPPING always abides by high standards of business ethics. We strictly comply with domestic and foreign laws and regulations, and have established working mechanisms against bribery and for clarifying reported misconduct. We have zero tolerance of corruption, and are striving to foster a corporate culture that values integrity in order to build an upstanding and honest team.
Clarifying and implementing anti- corruption responsibilities
Clarifying the anti-corruption work plan and department responsibilities, to promote the implementation of anti-corruption work
   Strengthening risk
management           and control
Part of COSCO SHIPPING's risk management measures in 2019
Risk monitoring and audit         Overseas risk management
Enhancing anti-corruption supervision
Enhancing risk prevention
and management
      Organizing subsidiaries to formulate compliance systems and working mechanisms to improve systemic risk management capabilities
Formulating a risk accountability list to fully implement risk management responsibilities
Identifying business and operational risks, and establishing a risk database, to further improve the risk system
Piloting risk monitoring and early warning, setting financial and quasi- financial business risk assessment and early warning indicators, and strengthening the prevention and control capability of key business risks
Establishing and improving the organizational structure and working mechanism for anti- corruption supervision, which are responsible for formulating anti-corruption systems, daily inspection, education, etc., to improve our anti-corruption supervision capability
Implementing the requirements of the "six self-inspections" to sort out and rectify anti- corruption management defects
Fostering an anti-corruption cultural environment
Carrying out case sharing, warning education, etc. on COSCO SHIPPING's anti-corruption website, to help foster an anti-corruption cultural environment
Organizing anti-corruption trainings to enhance employees' anti-corruption awareness. In 2019, we carried out trainings on the theme of "staying true to our original aspiration" across the board
    Organizing the signing of responsibility letters for strict Party self-governance, the supervision responsibility and "one post with functional duty and anti-corruption
 responsibility", to implement the anti-corruption management responsibility level by level. We signed 120 pieces of the three responsibility
   letters and 321 pieces of Letters of Commitment for Integrity in 2019
           Preparing and improving the anti- monopoly compliance management manual, international sanction risk compliance guidelines, etc. to enhance overseas risk management capabilities
Conducting risk analysis and countermeasure research on major international events to improve our risk response
      Carrying out risk monitoring and audit, and following up evaluation and defects rectification, to make up for the lack of risk management mechanism
       12
13

Sustainability Management
Sustainability Management
  Sustainability Management
Supporting the idea that "sustainable development is the 'golden key' to solving global problems", we integrate the concept of sustainable development and the vision of "Innovative, Coordinated, Green, Open and Shared Development" into the Group's operation management, taking into account the expectations and demands of stakeholders, and balance economic, social and environmental responsibilities, making unremitting efforts to realize the common development of the Group and its stakeholders.
Sustainability Philosophy
Fulfilling social responsibility is a micro foundation and an inevitable requirement for enterprise to achieve high-quality development with the society. We uphold the social responsibility philosophy of "create value and bridge dreams", and work with our stakeholders to create a more sustainable industry and social ecology.
Analysis of Material Topics
In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING systematically analyzed material topics according to the definition of material topics in GRI Sustainability Reporting Standards. Based on the industry's sustainable development, peer benchmarking and stakeholder survey, the Group identified 19 material topics. We prioritized the material topics from two dimensions: the impact on economy, environment and society, and the importance to the decision-making of stakeholders, and then clarified the focus of social responsibility management and information disclosure, so as to better communicate with stakeholders.
To be an excellent leader in the world shipping industry
We aim to be a world-class shipping and logistics enterprise with international competitiveness, brand influence, and high reputation among customers, with a complete global business chain; our global resource allocation must be optimized to serve global trade, promote commercial civilization for global connectivity and bring convenience and happiness to all humans.
To be an excellent practitioner of social responsibility
In strong compliance with the law, long-lasting development must be realized with stronger capacity and better growth. Excellent development results must be achieved in order to fulfill our social responsibility and execute the global compact; due care must be given to the global environment and poverty-stricken areas with engagement in international aid; a role of "good corporate citizen" must also be played to promote coordinated development of both the Group and society.
To be the best supporter of employee growth
Employees' pursuit of self-value must be respected through the provision of a broad platform for
their personal development, a solid material foundation and a decent humanistic environment; a good employer brand must be built to realize the unification of "individual" and "corporate" dreams.
To be a considerate service provider for global customers
Customer trust must be valued by rendering of professional service; a leading integrated service platform for global supply chains must be built to provide global customers with more advanced, higher-quality, and more efficient industry-wide chain services, and to maximize customer values.
and safety
Risk management
High
Boosting unimpeded trade
 Targeted poverty
alleviation CSR management
Pollution prevention and control
Caring for the crew
Addressing climate change
Staff development
Protection of employee rights and interests
Supporting the development of local communities
Safety management
Promoting industry development
Occupational health
Quality customer services
Integrity and compliance
Innovative
Marine ecological protection
Sustainable value growth
Sustainable procurement
Governance Economy Environment Staff Community
High
   Medium
Impact on Economy, Environment and Society
Material Topics Matrix
    14 1
1
5
5
Importance to the Decision- making of Stakeholders

Sustainability Management
Sustainability Management
  Contributing to the UN SDGs
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development was deliberated and passed at the United Nations Sustainable Development Summit in September 2015. It proposed 17 SDGs and charted the way for governments and enterprises around the world to contribute to them. COSCO SHIPPING has evaluated the SDGs by criticality and importance and accordingly divided them into primary SDGs and relevant SDGs. We concentrate our resources and expertise to help achieve primary SDGs, and by so doing, contribute our share to sustainable development.
Stakeholders Communication and Engagement
COSCO SHIPPING maintains an honest and trustworthy relationship with customers, employees and partners and fulfills the mission of maximizing the returns to shareholders, society and the environment. We continuously improve multi-tiered and multi-directional channels of communication with customers, employees, communities and other stakeholders, improving the communication mechanism based on mutual trust and commitment and promoting social responsibility management.
Stakeholder identification and communication
Category
SDGs
Practices and progress
Primary SDGs
      Adopting targeted measures according to local conditions to help poverty-stricken areas fight poverty
Ensuring unimpeded global energy trade and helping build an economical and clean global energy ecosystem for all
Creating decent job opportunities in project areas and continuing to help employees enhance sustainable employability
Embracing green development, managing shipping- related environmental impacts, and protecting the marine ecology
Actively participating in international cooperation under the Belt and Road Initiative and contributing to sustainable development together with our stakeholders
Relevant SDGs
           Conducting R&D alone or through cooperation and promoting the sound development of the shipping industry
Creating an inclusive, fair, and caring working environment and building a harmonious and competitive team
Promoting unimpeded trade and thus coordinated regional development
 Stakeholders
Core demands
Communication and responses
The Government
Serving national and local economic and social development
Compliant operation
Fair competition
Official document exchange Information disclosure Policy implementation Visits and exchange
Shareholders
Good business performance
Good corporate governance
Risk control
Realization of corporate development strategy Adequate information disclosure
Shareholders' general meeting Performance report
Road show
Communication with investors
Customers
Efficient products Quality service Information security
Investigation of customers' demand Official website
WeChat platform
Partners
Win-win cooperation
Industrial development through joined efforts
Exchange and visit Industry forum
Employees
Guarantee of rights and interests
Good prospect for career development Comfortable working environment
Cultural building
Workers' Congress
Employee training and activities
Communities
Engaging in philanthropy
Serving community development
Voluntary service
Public benefit activities Targeted poverty alleviation
The Environment
Systematic environmental management Supporting green industry development
Environmental policies Green investment
    16
17

CSR Focus I
Taking China further onto the Global Stage and Making New Endeavors in a New Era
CSR Focus I
Taking China further onto the Global Stage and Making New Endeavors in a New Era
     The uprising of M.V. Hai Liao
On September 19, 1949, on the eve of the founding of the PRC, M.V. Hai Liao forced its way through heavy blockades and eventually returned to the port of Dalian, becoming
The opening of the PRC's first international liner service
In May 1967, M.V. Dun Huang set out from the Port of Huangpu to Western Europe, marking the launch of the first international liner service in the PRC.
CSR Focus I Taking China further onto the Global Stage and Making New Endeavors in a New Era
   the first ship to fly the Five-starred Red Flag, the national flag of the People's Republic
of China, opening a new chapter in China's shipping industry.
1949
1961
1967
The opening of the first south-north service
On April 25, 1968, M.V. Li Ming carrying 11,000 metric tons
of sugar headed northward from the Port of Zhanjiang
and successfully arrived at the Port of Qingdao on May 8. After unloading and loading, it went south on June 2 following the original route and arrived in Zhanjiang on June 14. This was the first south-north voyage since the founding of PRC.
  The year 1949 marked the founding of the PRC and opened up a new chapter of the Chinese history. Over the past seventy years, China's shipping industry has grown from scratch, overcome trials and hardships, and built China into a great shipping country in name and in fact. As the industry pioneer and leader, COSCO SHIPPING has been deeply involved in this journey, witnessing the country sailing from offshore to ocean and growing from a late-comer to a leader on the international stage. We have contributed our share to national socioeconomic development, reform and opening up, and the improvement of people's lives. We have written an important chapter in the country's grand epic of striving for excellence and prosper.
The establishment of China Ocean Shipping (Group) Company
On July 1, 1997, China Ocean Shipping (Group) Company was founded based on the merger of five companies directly under the Ministry of Transport, namely, Shanghai Ocean Shipping (Group) Company, Guangzhou Ocean Shipping (Group) Company, Dalian Ocean Shipping (Group) Company, MASES and CCCC., and headquartered in Shanghai.
The establishment of COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation
In October 2005, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation was founded. It is one of the first non-public, non-profit charity foundations initiated and established by a central state- owned enterprise with the approval of the State Council.
2005
The establishment of the PRC's first ocean shipping company
On April 27, 1961, China Ocean Shipping Company (COSCO) was founded in Beijing, making the cable address "COSCO" known to the rest of the world.
The maiden voyage of the People's Republic's first liner "Guang Hua"
1968
  On April 28, 1961, the PRC's first passenger and cargo liner "M.V. Guang Hua" – literally meaning ""bringing honor to the Chinese nation", with all the expectations from the motherland and the people, set sail to Indonesia to bring overseas Chinese back. On May 17, it returned to Huangpu Port, Guangzhou, safe and sound with 577 overseas Chinese passengers. The maiden voyage marked the birth of China's ocean shipping fleet.
1997
  19
 18
Responsibility focus

CSR Focus I
Taking China further onto the Global Stage and Making New Endeavors in a New Era
CSR Focus I Taking China further onto the Global Stage and Making New Endeavors in a New Era
      COSCO SHIPPING Ports PERU (Chancay) Project officially delivered
On the afternoon of May 13 (local time in
Peru), the official delivery ceremony of COSCO SHIPPING Ports PERU (Chancay) Project
was held in the President Residence. COSCO SHIPPING will strive to turn the port of Chancay, its first greenfield project in South America, into a model of Sino-Peru cooperation within the Belt and Road Initiative framework.
2016 Chinese President Xi Jinping waved 2019 to COSCO SHIPPING ROSE and
 The founding of China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited, the world's largest shipping company
On February 18, 2016, China Shipping (Group) Company and China Ocean Shipping (Group) Company were merged into China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited, and headquartered in Shanghai.
2018
  The first foreign port franchise obtained by a Chinese company
In April 2009, the Greek Parliament approved the port franchise agreement signed by COSCO and the Piraeus Port Authority of Greece. This was the first time a Chinese company was granted the port franchise abroad.
2009
the Panama Canal. President Xi extended warm greetings to the crew and wished them "a safe voyage". He also sincerely hoped that shipping logistics will continuously improve and make greater contributions to China's shipping industry and world trade prosperity.
2013
The maiden voyage of M.V. Yong Sheng along the Arctic Northeast Passage, making it the first Chinese merchant ship to arrive at the Arctic
On September 10, 2013, COSCO's M.V. Yong Sheng successfully completed its maiden voyage along the Arctic Northeast Passage, marking it the first Chinese merchant ship to arrive in Europe via the Arctic Northeast Passage.
In December 2018, during his visit to Panama, Chinese President Xi Jinping spoke by phone with the captain of COSCO SHIPPING ROSE while passing through the New Panamax Locks on
talked to the captain by phone
   20 2
2
1
1
Over the past seventy years, COSCO SHIPPING has overcome trials and hardships, advanced with the country and the times, made remarkable changes and achievements, and written a magnificent history. As the saying goes, a review of the past will better prepare us for the future. Down the road, COSCO SHIPPING will, guided by Xi Jinping Thought on Socialism with Chinese Characteristics for a New Era, remain true to our original aspiration and keep the mission firmly in mind, and share weal and woe and make progress alongside with the country. Braving the waves, we will advance corporate development and make greater contributions to the development of world shipping and the prosperity of global trade.

CSR Focus II
Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
CSR Focus II
Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
   Training villagers on tea growing
  The pursuit of a better life is a dream shared by all of mankind. To build a moderately prosperous society in all respects, we must win the critical battle against poverty, in which central SOEs play a major role. COSCO SHIPPING has customized anti-poverty assistance to Anhua County and Fuling County in Hunan Province, Yongde County in Yunnan Province, and Lhorong County and Riwoqê County in Changdu City, Tibet.
Based on local needs and our characteristics and industry advantages, we have made targeted efforts to boost local industrial development, education, healthcare, and employment, to improve local people's living standards and to contribute to a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
Official management
Dispatching 18 officials to take temporary rotating posts in five designated counties and assessing their performance, preparing the Handbook of Officials Taking Temporary Posts to regulate the management of them, and conducting regular training and exchanges to enhance their ability to perform duties
System building
Formulating the Key Work Points of Poverty Alleviation and Aid to
Tibet in 2019 , and clarifying the poverty alleviation and aid work plan, implementation points, etc., strictly implementing the Regulations on the Management of Targeted Assistance Work , and establishing a standardized operation system, to ensure the compliant implementation of each project
Extensive engagement
Signing strategic cooperation agreements with the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of Hunan, Tibet, etc., to promote paired targeted poverty alleviation, and realizing full-scale participation of the Group and subsidiaries in local poverty alleviation work with the participation of a total of 19 subsidiaries
Improving Living Conditions
We strive to meet the most basic needs of people living below the poverty line by improving local public services and infrastructures. We have launched projects in the eco-friendly and livable Bulang Demonstration Village, Dashan Township, Yongde Country, to provide drinking water for human and animals and industrial irrigation water. We have donated new dining tables, dining chairs and recliners to the nursing home in Jiemuxi Township, Yuanling County. We have built new undercurrent dams and other facilities and laid 8,850 meters of drinking water pipelines in Lhorong County, Tibet, to provide drinking water for nearly 20,000 people. In addition, we have launched safe drinking water projects in Changmaoling Township and Gangse Township, Riwoqê County, to ensure local drinking water safety.
In 2019
CSR Focus II Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
  RMB 69.33 million invested in poverty alleviation by
COSCO SHIPPING and our subsidiaries
RMB 18.03 million invested in poverty alleviation by COSCO
SHIPPING Charity Foundation
RMB 90.65 million
total investment of COSCO SHIPPING in
poverty alleviation
 Among the five counties receiving our targeted anti-poverty assistance, Riwoqê County, Lhorong County and Anhua County have been lifted out of poverty.
   "
We must follow the right direction of poverty alleviation, laser-focus on the goals, and concentrate efforts to eliminate absolute poverty. We must provide more support for the impoverished counties and villages not officially designated as poor and see to it that the poverty elimination standards and procedures are strictly followed in poor counties and the results stand the test of time.   — Xi Jinping
In 2019
  RMB 17 million invested in drinking water and
irrigation water projects in Tibet
 23
  22
We fully mobilize human, institutional and financial resources to support our paired-up counties in areas such as infrastructure, healthcare, education, employment, industry and consumption, to improve their productivity and employment rate and eliminate poverty.
Responsibility focus
 "

CSR Focus II
Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
Protecting People's Health
"Prosperity for all is impossible without health for all." Poor areas often suffer from poor medical and health conditions. In 2019, we invested in the "Kindness Project Hearing Aid Action" and donated hearing aid equipment to Yiyang City, Anhua County and Yuanling County in Hunan Province, and Yongde County in Yunnan Province, for hearing check, hearing aid fitting, hearing test, training for hearing aid specialist. We invested in the "Voyage • Benevolence" Traditional Chinese Medicine Special Training Camp project to train TCM practitioners for Yongde County, Anhua County and Yuanling County. We also provided funds for COSCO SHIPPING- Seqinmeiduo Medical Care Talent Training Foundation to train medical staff and rewarded 9 medical staff who had received honors and qualifications in the autonomous regions and the country.
In 2019
Poverty alleviation story
Setting up village-level clinics to make medical services accessible to villagers
Due to inconvenient transportation, Yongde County in Yunnan Province has long been backward in medical and health conditions. To solve the problem, we invested RMB 2.735 million in setting up village-level standardized clinics in 14 villages such as Manghai Village in Dedang Township. Each clinic is equipped with a consulting room, a treatment room, a pharmacy, an infusion rooms and other functional rooms, as well as public toilets.
These clinics are scattered in nine townships (towns) in Yongde County, benefiting 36,347 rural people of 9,007 households in 14 villages. At the same time, we also provided assistance in training personnel, purchasing medical equipment, improving the quality of medics, to reduce the medical burden and promote the medical development of Yongde County.
CSR Focus II Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
Stimulating the Momentum for Industry Development
Developing local industries is key to creating jobs for the impoverished so that they can have a stable source of income to protect them from poverty. COSCO SHIPPING has explored a new poverty alleviation mechanism based on the resources of poor counties to boost
Yongde County, Yunnan Province
Anhua County, Hunan Province
Yuanling County, Hunan Province
   local industries.
We invested RMB 4.3 million and mobilized RMB 1 million of local poverty alleviation fund to establish 3 village- level collectively-owned tea plants to generate stable income for the collective economy.
We invested RMB 3.45 million in a state-owned medicinal herbal plantation base in Tianzhuang Township and a state-owned tea plantation in Xianlong Village.
We invested RMB 3.9 million to build the Jiemuxi Village Tourist Service Center and support the development of planting and breeding cooperatives and farmhouses. We invested RMB 1 million to expand the stage of the real scene show "Niu Zi Hua Kai" and promote the quality and creativity of real scene shows, making it the core resource for the tourism development of Jiemuxi Village.
Poverty alleviation story
The tea industry in Yongde County
     RMB 1 million
invested in the "Kindness Project Hearing Aid Action", with 1
Yongde County in Yunnan Province is a major tea producer in China, with many ancient tea plants. It is known as the World Tea Culture Museum, the World Center for Tea Plant Evolution and Variation and one of the central origins of tea plants in the world.
COSCO SHIPPING has supported the development of the local tea industry and the promotion of the tea culture. We purchased tea products from the county, sponsored the "Yonghai Cup" Tea Ceremony Competition, and launched a training program on tea growing and making.
   hearing aid adjustment equipment and 538 hearing aids donated
  RMB 1 million
invested in COSCO SHIPPING- Seqinmeiduo Medical Care Talent
 Training Foundation, with 126 medical staff trained
RMB 1.5 million
invested in the "Voyage · Kindness" Traditional Chinese Medicine
 Special Training Camp project, with 127 TCM practitioners trained
COSCO SHIPPING Fangmachang Tea Factory
Promoting Educational Development
"To lift people out of poverty, we need to see that they have access to education." Allowing children in poor areas to access to good education is an important way to stop the intergenerational transmission of poverty. In 2019, we supported the educational development in poverty-stricken areas by repairing buildings in primary and secondary schools, buying teaching equipment, assisting the "Teaching for China" program, and providing financial aid to students at COSCO SHIPPING Hope Class and COSCO SHIPPING Self-improvement Class. Moreover, we set up scholarships and grants, carried out "COSCO SHIPPING - Ganglameiduo" scholarship and grant program, and provided assistance to financially challenged students and teachers. We also invited 30 outstanding Young Pioneers from Anhua County, Yuanling County, and Yongde County to participate in the "Sailing to the Blue Sea" summer camp.
Building Platforms for Employment
Employment matters the most in people's lives. Combining our own human resource needs and the needs of poverty-stricken areas, we train forest rangers, TCM practitioners, tea art specialists, seafarers, to enable the impoverished live a self-reliant life and get rich through hard work. In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING and 12 subsidiaries once again held a special job fair in Yongde County, offering 992 jobs. Since 2018, we have helped 327 impoverished rural workers find jobs in urban areas. COSCO SHIPPING Seafarer Management Co., Ltd. has started the seafarer training and employment project in Hunan Province, providing tuition reduction and exemption for students from disadvantaged families.
24
In 2019
RMB 14.47 million invested in education in poverty-
In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING donated three tea factories in Fangmachang Village, Banka Township, Yakou Village, Xiaomengtong Town, and Mangjiantian Village, Dedang Town, and offered one-stop assistance to the tea industry, ranging from donating tea plants, providing technical support and training to consuming tea products, to help tea enterprises expand market channels and improve quality. The tea factories are the collective asset of the villages and are entrusted to local leading tea enterprises for operation, with property rights and management rights separated. The tea enterprises pay both fixed and floating dividends to the villages.
Before the tea factories, local tea products had few buyers and the selling price was very low. With standardized, automated and clean production lines, the tea factories have improved the quality of tea products, and increased the income of tea farmers and tea enterprises, truly delivering benefits to the impoverished.
 stricken areas
2,905 students received financial aid
In 2019
Diversifying Sales Channels to Boost Farmers'Income
By expanding the marketing channels for local agricultural products, we can help increase the income of villagers and lift them out of poverty. We have actively mobilized resources, including our centralized procurement network and various online sales platforms, and external online sales channels of the Agricultural Bank of China and China Construction Bank, to promote the sales of local agricultural products. At the same time, we make Zang Jing Water the designated water provided during employee activities, as well as the summer high temperature gifts and the labor union benefits to employees, to support the local economic development in Tibet.
In 2019
  120
worth
bought by COSCO SHIPPING
of them found a job on board
RMB 9.86 million worth of products made in poor areas
 360 sailors trained in the seafarer training and
purchased and sold with the support of COSCO SHIPPING
employment project
57,000
boxes of Zang Jing Water
RMB 3.06 million 25

 Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
Innovation
Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
  As China strives for prosperity and rejuvenation,
it needs to devote great energy to advance the progress in science and technology, and endeavor to be a global science center and innovation highland.
— Xi Jinping
Development is the paramount task. Human resource is the biggest asset. Innovation is the primary driving force. If China does not follow the innovation-driven development path or replace old drivers with new ones smoothly, it can only be a large country instead of a truly strong country.
— Xi Jinping
 As emerging technologies such as the Internet of Things (IoT), big data and artificial intelligence (AI) continue to develop, the world has entered the fourth industrial revolution that is networked, IT- enabled and intelligent. It has not only given birth to emerging technology industries, but also brought opportunities for traditional industries to change. As the world's largest shipping company, COSCO SHIPPING embraces emerging technologies and deeply applies information and intelligent technologies to the shipping industry, striving to lead the shipping innovation and transformation in the digital era, and drive the industry's high-quality development and building of a strong maritime country.
 26
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
  In the digital and intelligent age, COSCO SHIPPING is driving development with innovation, cultivating an enabling culture for independent innovation, and exploring new technologies and operation and management methods in fields such as ships, ports and shipping services, so as to pursue innovation, reform and sustainable development of the shipping industry.
 27

Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
Building up Excellence in Innovation
Innovation is the endogenous force driving corporate and social development and takes place in every dimension of social life. COSCO SHIPPING has put forward the vision of "building an excellent company empowered and driven by intelligent technology" and set the goal for 2025. We hope to enhance our overall competitiveness and cultivate an innovative ecosystem by creating a culture and environment that enables innovation, and cultivates internal innovators.
In 2019
specialists recruited
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
Building a Smart Shipping Ecosystem
In 2019, the Ministry of Transport and six other ministries and commissions jointly issued the Opinions on the Development of Smart Shipping, pointing out that the integrated development of shipping and high-tech is a global trend and will help enhance the competitiveness of China's shipping and related industries and build China into a country with a strong transportation network, abundant innovators and a modern economic system. In line with China's pursuit of innovation-driven development, COSCO SHIPPING focuses on digital transformation and deeply applies high technologies to ships, shipping insurance, ports, shipping services, surveillance. While enhancing our own innovation capabilities and competitiveness, we also work with our partners to create an innovation-friendly industry ecosystem and promote the sustainable development of the shipping industry.
Smart Ships
Smart shipbuilding is the foundation for and key to smart shipping. We have closely followed and participated in the R&D and application of smart shipbuilding technologies at home and abroad, benchmarked the world's leading smart shipbuilding standards, and formulated the Three-Year Action Plan for Smart Ships . Considering the full life cycle of a ship, we have expanded the application scenarios of smart technologies and improved the ship's performance comprehensively, which will facilitate building smart ships that represent the future of the shipping industry.
   In 2019, we encouraged our subsidiaries to establish an organizational mechanism to promote independent technological innovation and enhance innovation vitality and capabilities. COSCO SHIPPING Lines, COSCO SHIPPING Bulk, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers, COSCO SHIPPING Property, and COSCO SHIPPING (Shanghai) have established respective technological innovation leading groups and systematically formulated management and promotion plans for technological innovation.
S&T personnel
73
52
21
IT specialists
RMB 2.18 billion invested in technological innovation
by COSCO SHIPPING in 2019
           Establish a technological innovation organization to systematically promote the implementation of technological innovation work plans
Setting standards for the entry of technological and information experts
Cooperating with universi- ties on scientific research and talent training
1
2
Formulating technological innovation plans
3
Formulating the Special Plan for Technological Development to point out the development direction of technological innovation
Improving incentives for technological innovation
Formulating a management mechanism for technological innovation projects
Building a technological innovation database
Coordinated planning
Improving the fleet's intelligence level, management capabilities and data service capabilities, to serve immediate and long-term goals
Case
Data sharing
Building a ship- to-shore ship data center that shares data with the safety control system to strengthen ship data management
Data application service
Relying on the accumulation and analysis of big data generated from the ship data center to provide comprehensive smart ship data services for shipping companies
Cross-industry coordination
Strengthening cross- industry cooperation and international exchanges, and improving data service capabilities, to realize economical, reliable and safe ship intelligence
Establishing a
technological innovation organiza-
tional system Fostering an
 innovative corporate 4 ecosystem
COSCO SHIPPING LOTUS opens a new chapter in the intelligent development of large oceangoing container vessels
   Strengthening innovative talent cultivation
Deepening techno- logical innovation management
Smart ships represent a key link in the smart shipping system. Oceangoing ships with the intelligent system will be "smarter", safer and more efficient in responding to unexpected and complicated sea state and meteorological changes. Since 2016, SSSRI has participated in the national smart ship project. It has carried out R&D on key systems of smart ships, promoted the onboard verification of the research results, and accelerated the transfer of smart ship technologies, thus contributing to the development of smart ships.
On December 4, 2019, COSCO SHIPPING launched the world's first large smart container ship for commercial use at the 20th Marintec China (China International Maritime Technology Conference and Exhibition 2019). After years of trials and technical optimization, the 13,500-TEU large smart container ship, COSCO SHIPPING LOTUS, officially set sail. COSCO SHIPPING LOTUS is equipped with intelligent systems and facilities such as intelligent navigation, intelligent engine room, intelligent energy efficiency, and intelligent communication gateways to provide information and data support for ship operation, equipment maintenance, and energy efficiency management, and improve ship operation and maintenance.
    Part of COSCO SHIPPING' s measures for promoting technological innovation
                  28
29

Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
  Smart Ports
In 2019, China officially launched the commercial use of the 5th-generation mobile networks. The 5G technology not only supports high data rates with less latency, but also expands the mobile networks to the field of mobile IoT, realizing the communication between people and things, and among things. It builds a cross-industry integrated ecosystem and raises the level of digitalization across society. We are applying 5G technology to port operation and management to upgrade the digital port system and pursue the intelligent transformation and development of ports.
Smart Service
At the opening ceremony of the World Shipping Summit 2018, Chairman Xu Lirong said that the shipping industry remained a service business despite changing market factors. We seize the opportunity of digital transformation and continue to develop the "Internet+" modern shipping service system to meet customers' needs for smart and convenient services.
Case
Building a resource integration platform to facilitate trade
 Case
5G empowers smart ports
   Xiamen Ocean Gate Container Terminal (XOCT) is China's first proprietary all-electric zero-emission automated port put into commercial operation. In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Ports promoted the application of 5G and IoT technologies and realized multi-dimensional real-time synchronization of ship- shore data, remote precision control, and high-definition real-time monitoring of ports, which further improved the port efficiency and safety.
In July 2019, XOCT signed a strategic cooperation agreement with China Mobile to realize full coverage of 5G signals, and the communication control and intelligent tally of Automated Guided Vehicles (AGV). In addition, the designated 5G network can also separate port data from the data of other corporate business.
Strengthening safety monitoring of terminals
Realizing real-time data synchronization of panoramic terminal monitoring and high- altitude patrol equipment to help identify and manage hidden safety hazards in time
XOCT uses 5G technology to
 Enhancing ship- to-shore data communication
improve port Realizing smart operation and operation
Using ship-to-shore data synchronization to enable the simultaneous docking of information and ships, and save manpower and time
efficiency
Improving the transmission efficiency and identification accuracy of automated tally data to accurately receive and execute instructions and thus achieve smart terminal operation
 An automated guided vehicle (AGV) at the XOCT terminal
 30
31
In order to facilitate communication, information disclosure and trade along the shipping industrial chain, COSCO SHIPPING Bulk and COSCO SHIPPING Technology have jointly developed Chuanhuoyi, an online service platform. It integrates coastal market resources and brings together ship owners, cargo owners and agencies to improve the efficiency of domestic bulk transportation and promote orderly and healthy development of the market.
The unmanned automated terminal

Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress
  Smart Industry Ecosystem
In 2019
research projects carried out by COSCO SHIPPING
Entering a New Business Domain
Along with continuous economic and social development and a rising consumption level, cruise tourism is increasingly popular among Chinese tourists craving for a novel tourist experience. In 2018, documents jointly issued by Ministry of Transport and other departments predicts that by 2035, China's cruise market will become one of the most dynamic markets in the world, with breakthroughs made in independent design and building of cruise and cruise fleet, a sound and highly efficient industrial chain, an ever-growing scale, and a prominent role in supporting urban transformation, industrial upgrading, economic development, and people's consumption. COSCO SHIPPING has leveraged its financing resources for the shipping industry and expanded into the cruise industry.
Already the largest shipping company in the world, we are striving to lead the global shipping industry with innovation and vitality by giving full play to our business coordination advantages and resource endowments. To this end, we cooperate extensively with domestic and foreign peer companies, government departments, industry organizations, universities and other institutions to carry out forward-looking research, build an innovative industry ecosystem, and promote the high-quality development of the shipping industry.
• Promoting the development of digital innovation
• Carrying out mutually beneficial cooperation in shipping logistics and digitalization • Building 5G laboratory collectively
Cross-industry coordination and collaboration
52
 25
projects of 2017
27
projects of 2018
Case
Contributing to the orderly development of the cruise industry by integrating shipping and tourist services
 Cutting-edge technology research
Giving full play to the integrated effect of world-level technology centers, and carrying out cutting-edge technology research, to realize technological reform of the industry
22
 Luxury cruise ships, aircraft carriers, and large liquefied natural gas (LNG) ships are called "three pearls on the crown of the global shipbuilding industry". But China's cruise industry has encountered a "cold winter" due to excessive and chaotic market competition. In order to promote the high-quality development and supply-side structural reform of the cruise industry, COSCO SHIPPING and China National Travel Service Group Corporation (CTS Group) have joined hands to build Piano Land, the first luxury cruise independently operated by China, increasing China's influence in the global cruise industry.
Guided by the Group, COSCO SHIPPING Development has taken advantages of its one-stop shipping-related financial services and reached a package deal of ship purchase and leasing with CTG Cruise Business Division to boost the development of the Chinese cruise industry.
In addition, Piano Land has formed a benign interaction with COSCO SHIPPING and its affiliated companies, in the field of ship insurance, ship agency, ship modification, crew labor dispatch, fuel oil supply, and material supply, which promoted the growth of the Group's cruise industry chain.
          Building a smart industry ecosystem
Industry standard formulation
Relying on rich industry experience and practices to participate in the formulation of domestic and foreign shipping technology standards and industry rules
projects passed the acceptance inspection
2projects passed provincial/ministerial- level appraisal
We were entrusted by the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology to compile the Guidelines for Polar Water Operational Manual.
The solar energy project co-developed with Wuhan University of Technology was awarded the first prize of science and technology of 2018 by China Institute of Navigation.
 Case
Promoting the orderly development of the shipping industry with GCSP
  The Global Carrier Schedule Performance (GCSP) is a yardstick to measure the quality of container liner services. With real-time big data of container ships across the world, GCSP measures shipping service providers' performance in major routes and ports globally, and accordingly, urges them to improve management efficiency and services.
In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Lines assisted Shanghai Shipping Exchange in running the GCSP, the results of which can guide customers to choose service providers with better services and higher efficiency, or more cost-effective services according to their schedule and budget. Therefore the use of GSCP is a win-win solution for shipping companies and customers and conducive to the orderly development of the shipping industry.
32
33

 Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
Coordination
Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  We need to proceed from the reality, work for long-term interests, and strengthen coordination of the sustainable development of economy and society, resources and the environment, as well as human and nature.
— Xi Jinping
 Coordination is an inherent requirement for sustainable and healthy development. In pursuit of collaborative progress, COSCO SHIPPING strengthens the coordination and cooperation of industry clusters and consolidates high-quality development results. It also takes into account the development needs of the industry and the region and builds harmonious relations characterized by co-existence and common prosperity, creating a new pattern of collaborative development.
 34
Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  We synergize advantageous resources inside and outside of the Group, provide platforms for talents to grow, and stimulate the development momentum of the industry.
 We continue to improve our port network, expand our logistics supply chain services, and cooperate strategically with local governments, to share high-quality resources and promote the coordinated and balanced regional development.
 We adopt strict entry, selection, evaluation, and exit mechanisms for suppliers, and strengthen management of suppliers' performance in such dimensions as safety, environment and labor, to create a healthy and sustainable supply chain, and develop sustainable products.
 We actively organize and participate in industry exchanges and cooperation, promote the preparation of industry regulations with our expertise, and work together with peer companies to bring prosperity to the shipping industry.
    35

Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  Consolidating the Basis for Work Safety
Work safety is the basis for our management and operation. We stay goal- and problem-oriented in managing work safety. Based on the Key Tasks for Work Safety in 2019 , we have bettered the safety management system and the dual control mechanism against safety risk to safeguard the stable development of the Group.
Improving Safety Management Efficiency
We apply the high-standard safety management system to all links of production, coordinate the safety work of all business sectors, and employ IT platforms to deliver more efficient and orderly safety management.
Strengthening Safety Risk Prevention and Control
COSCO SHIPPING has formulated the Regulations on Work Safety Risk Management , which provides a solid basis for the prevention and control of safety risks in various industrial clusters. We focus on the risks of fire, explosion, collision, work injury, piracy and pollution, identify and eliminate hidden hazards, and advance the construction of the dual control mechanism, in order to minimize the possibility of safety incidents.
     Strict supervision over the safety work of directly-administrated units
Signing the 2019 Work Safety Responsibility Letter with all directly-administered units, and carrying out safety assessment based on the principle of "same responsibility of party committees and governments, one post with functional duty and anti-corruption responsibility, joint management, and accountability for dereliction of duty"; reviewing the safety system of each directly-administered unit, and supervising and advancing their safety management system
Accelerating integration of safety management work
Aligning safety management work with Hainan Harbor & Shipping Holding, COSCO SHIPPING Development and other restructured, newly-merged units, to promote faster integration of the safety work of relevant units into the Group's safety management system
Enhancing the supervision over ships
Clarifying the key safety inspection areas of ships, and standardizing the identification and pre-control of operation safety risks of ships
Paying attention to the risk of third-party services
Strengthening process assessment
Strengthening the work safety process assessment of safety investment, team management, stakeholder management, etc., and realizing the timely identification and rectification of weak links and safety management blind spots
    Carrying out special risk prevention
and control research on third-party services (ship management/crew), to consolidate the safety defense line of external businesses
COSCO SHIPPING's safety risk prevention and control measures
 Part of COSCO SHIPPING's safety management measures
Case
 Empowering safety management with technologies
 COSCO SHIPPING stresses the use of technology for safety. We continue to upgrade IT-enabled safety management and build safety management platforms, to improve the efficiency and effect of safety regulation.
Hangbiao is a comprehensive platform newly developed by COSCO SHIPPING for the management of shipping, ship maintenance, and crew. In 2019, its energy efficiency performance module and operational manual were developed, consolidating and improving the detailed safety management.
Developing the Open Water Vessel Collision Avoidance Supporting System
Promoting the application of the GMDSS Online Training and Simulation System
Improving the emergency communication system
Upgrading the Hangbiao platform
 The system is initially ready, with field tests conducted, to reduce the frequency of vessel collision.
The Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS) is a maritime radio communication system proposed and implemented by the IMO for maritime distress, safety and general communications. The Group and Qingdao Ocean Shipping Mariners College are co-developing the GMDSS Online Training and Simulation System to help crew master rescue methods such as distress alerts and communications. By the end of 2019, the overall framework and part of the training content had been completed.
COSCO SHIPPING has carried out emergency communication tests with competent regulators at all levels and the scheduling and emergency response units of its subsidiaries, and marshaled resources to improve the coordinated emergency response mechanism.
36
37

Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  Enhancing Employees' Safety Awareness
We want every employee to fully understand that safety is our top priority. We have established a multi-level and full-coverage safety training system to raise employees' safety awareness and equip them with skills to effectively prevent and respond to possible safety risks.
Optimizing Customer Services
Adhering to our positioning as a service provider, we put ourselves in the shoes of customers to better understand their demands. We strive to develop new products, provide professional, specialized, sophisticated, tailor-made, and standardized services beyond the traditional boundary, and comprehensively strengthen our ability to create value.
Case
    Enriching training resources
Working with external experts to enrich training resources on occupational health, fire safety, emergency management, etc.
Promoting online education
The seafarer online safety education and training system has been installed, tested and improved on 105 ships of COSCO SHIPPING Energy, COSCO SHIPPING Bulk, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carrier, COSCO SHIPPING Ferry and other units
Promoting safety simulation training
Promoting educational concepts and methods such as safety motion sensing training, hands-on simulation training and audio-visual training, to strengthen the effectiveness of safety education and training
Shipping the equipment for international collaborative research projects with customized and professional services
  In October 2019, after two months of shipping, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics delivered the first super-large component of the ITER project's superconducting magnet feeder system (FEEDER) – the in-cryostat feeder of bottom correction coils (BCC ICF) at Marseille Fos Port in France, safe and sound.
The ITER project, also known as the "Artificial Sun" project, is the largest international interdisciplinary science project that the Chinese government is participating in. The materials shipped by COSCO SHIPPING Logistics were high-precision materials independently developed by China, of high scientific and market value. The shipping process faced many challenges: the materials were extremely difficult to transport by road, many logistics links were involved, the technical and quality assurance requirements were harsh. To make it worse, the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River was in the flood season. After rounds of study, survey and demonstration, the technical team of COSCO SHIPPING Logistics came up with a whole- process logistics solution from the domestic departure to the designated terminal in France. The team also renovated the ship to create customized services for transnational long-distance shipping of ultra-high, ultra-wide, and ultra-long pieces. By providing transportation guarantee for China's participation in the project, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics also improved its service capabilities and paved the way for going global.
COSCO SHIPPING's safety education and training
Fostering an Enabling Environment for Safety Research
Our safety work is based on in-depth safety research which allows us to prudently analyze the current status of safety management and identify the areas for improvement. We encourage employees to carry out special safety research and create a favorable research environment for them to consolidate our safety work results step by step.
       Jointly carrying out the special research on ship bridge team management and on the use of navigation equipment with the Inland Ship Navigation Committee of Chinese Institute of Navigation (CIN)
Actively recommending the papers published onCOSCO Maritime Safety
to participate in the evaluation of CIN, with 14 papers rated as excellent papers
Case
The scientific research project: Research and Application of Key Technologies for China Merchant Ships for Opening Arctic Shipping Routes won the "Science and Technology Special Award" from CIN
Organizing relevant experts to sort out and compile relevant materials compiled by World Ports and Waterways , with information sorted out on about 240 ports and waterways, totaling more than 700,000 Chinese characters, as of the end of 2019
Case
COSCO SHIPPING Energy provides high-quality and well-targeted customer services
       "Striving for perfection", COSCO SHIPPING Energy upholds "Credibility, Safety, Efficiency, Transparency" throughout the whole customer service process. In 2019, on the basis of thorough investigation, COSCO SHIPPING Energy improved its customer management process, aligned service procedures with customer demands, and realized dual-track customer service management inside and outside the company and seamless connection of key links, which improved customer services. In addition, the company further regulated procedures to better and more efficiently handle freight quality and customer complaints. To protect customer privacy in the age of informatization, the company revised theAccount Management Measures and regulated the access to customer information.
In 2019
Total customer complaints received and settled by COSCO SHIPPING Energy
  18
100% Handling rate of
100% Customer
complaints
satisfaction rate of complaints
           Some safety research projects and their outcomes
Innovation for "Safe Transportation"
  In 2019, the Safety Committee of the Ministry of Transport called for innovative cases of "Safe Transportation". COSCO SHIPPING Bulk signed up for it, with the hope to help employees better understand the value of safety work and share its innovative safety management practices. Its two projects, VLOC Bohai Deepwater Route Technical Support Information System and Research and Practice of Ship Culture Building Standardization , were crowned the Special Recommendation Project and Excellent Case Project respectively.
38
39

Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  Building a Harmonious Supply Chain
Boosting Industry Prosperity
High-quality corporate development benefits from a good industry ecosystem. We are committed to building mutually beneficial relationships with industry partners, deepening exchanges and cooperation, and investing more in talent cultivation, to inject new impetus into the industry.
Industry Exchanges and Cooperation
COSCO SHIPPING is active in organizing and participating in industry exchanges for information and experience sharing. At the same time, we encourage subsidiaries to leverage their expertise to help formulate industry rules and build a harmonious industry ecosystem.
As a member of the Baltic Asia Advisory Council, the Group continues to optimize the Baltic Dry Index (BDI) and promote its R&D and application. In addition, COSCO SHIPPING Bulk has participated in the index reform and contract template revisions of Shanghai Stock Exchange, the Baltic Exchange and the Baltic and International Maritime Council (BIMCO), contributing to the industry's sustainable development.
While regulating our own operations and practices, we are following our suppliers' sustainability performance. The Group's 6+1 industries involve many suppliers and customers. They are subject to not only the ever-changing market, but also suppliers' safety, environmental and labor performance.
The Group has already launched more than 20 policies such as the Supplier Management Measures , Procurement Management Measures, Centralized Procurement Management Measures , Basic Rules for Tendering Procurement and Basic Rules for Non-Tendering Procurement , to establish a strict mechanism for the entry, selection, evaluation and exit of suppliers. We have also ensured their full understanding, accountability, and implementation of the procurement procedures and policies through performance evaluation, survey-based guidance and other approaches, striving to avoid risks and create a healthy and sustainable supply chain.
In the 2019 SASAC Procurement Management Ranking of Central State-Owned Enterprises, COSCO SHIPPING ranked third in its category, making it to the top three for the second consecutive year.
  Case Strengthening the CSR practice management of suppliers
Case
Building a strong Ocean Alliance to meet future challenges
   Ocean Alliance is a collaborative industry organization jointly established by COSCO SHIPPING Lines, CMA CGM, Evergreen, and OOCL, aiming to provide services with higher frequency and quality and wider coverage. In January 2019, the Ocean Alliance extended the cooperation duration to 10 years until March 31, 2027, and launched a new service. By then, it had offered 40 services with the shipping capacity of around 3.86 million TEUs, covering Northwest Europe, Mediterranean, Southwest, Northwest and East Coast America and U.S. Gulf Area, transatlantic services, Middle East and Red Sea. The high-quality services have won it a good reputation and formed a virtuous circle of mutually reinforcing cooperation based on complementary advantages. The extension of the duration has guaranteed the long-term partnership of its members to jointly cope with future challenges.
 COSCO SHIPPING Development is committed to working with suppliers to build a more sustainable ecosystem and improve the CSR management across the industrial chain. To this end, it has established a procurement and supplier management committee and formulated the Supplier Management Measures to systematically regulate the approval, entry, regular audits and dynamic assessments of suppliers. Meanwhile, all suppliers must sign the Letter of Commitment against Commercial Bribery and fill in the Compliance Questionnaire to provide their information on occupational health and work safety, the environment, child labor, forced labor, salary and working hours, anti-discrimination, employee rights, supply chain. Based on the survey result, rewards will be given to suppliers with high rating, in order to strengthen their compliance awareness, enhance their CSR fulfillment capabilities, and point out the direction for their future CSR practices.
Shanghai Universal, a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING Development, is also actively managing suppliers' CSR practices and developing sustainable products. As a container manufacturer, Shanghai Universal has formulated theEvaluation and Management Measures for Suppliers of Centralized Procurement Materials . By prioritizing products from sustainable sources, Shanghai Universal encourages suppliers to obtain the Forest Stewardship Council (FSC) wood certification – the main raw material for container manufacturing. As of the end of 2019, 80% of its timber suppliers had obtained the FSC certification.
            40
41

Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development
  Industry Talent Cultivation
COSCO SHIPPING regards talents as an inexhaustible driving force for corporate development. In order to meet complex challenges, we are eagerly looking for inter-disciplinary professionals to expand our teams in various industrial clusters. We also regard industry talent training as our responsibility. We use our own platform advantages to study talent development and contribute to industry development.
In October 2019, COSCO SHIPPING and Shanghai Jiao Tong University signed a strategic cooperation agreement to establish a joint marine equipment R&D center. The center will serve as a bridge for the cooperation of the two sides and for the cultivation of international and high- end talents, so as to provide intellectual support for research projects and technological innovation in the industry.
In December 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Logistics and Dalian Maritime University agreed to expand cooperation and talent exchange and the university's internship platform and employment channels.
Driving Regional Development
Regional prosperity is the fertile soil for sustainable development of enterprises. We respond to and participate in the construction of Hainan Free Trade Zone and the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area, constantly improve our terminal network, and expand logistics services. We build strategic partnerships with local governments, industry partners and other stakeholders to share high-quality regional resources and promote coordinated and balanced regional development in China.
Case
Building a new port in Hainan to serve the construction of the Hainan Free Trade Zone (Port)
   In May 2019, the Group and the Hainan Provincial Government jointly established Hainan Harbor & Shipping Holding Co., Ltd. (HNHS) to integrate and upgrade Hainan's port and shipping resources.
Via HNHS, COSCO SHIPPING will expand its services in Hainan Free Trade Zone, build the Port into an important node of the regional logistics chain. By opening more
routes, we will constantly strengthen Hainan's
connectivity with the rest of the world in terms
 of breath and depth. We will make strong efforts to build Hainan Free Trade Zone (Port) into a regional international container hub port along the new land-sea corridor in western China and a national transshipment terminal for the Indo-Pacific region, thus driving regional socioeconomic development.
  42
43
In April 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Ports signed an investment agreement with the Guangzhou Nansha Economic and Technology Development Zone Commercial Bureau to launch the supply chain base project. The project will focus on "transforming from a terminal to a platform providing comprehensive logistics supply chain services" to serve the integrated development of the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Greater Bay Area.

 Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
Green
Development
Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
  We must not seek economic development at the cost of resources and the ecological environment – otherwise it would be like draining the pond
to catch the fish; nor should we protect the environment at the cost of economic growth, just as trying to catch a fish in a tree. Instead, we must coordinate environmental protection and economic development, adapt socioeconomic development to the carrying capacity of the population, resources and the environment,
and bring out the huge ecological, economic and social benefits of lucid waters and lush
— Xi Jinping
mountains.
 Protecting the ecology and promoting green shipping have become an important approach for shipping companies to compete globally. We always highlight marine ecological protection and take "developing the marine economy and protecting the marine ecology" as our primary corporate social responsibility. We actively participate in global response to climate change, and contribute to sustainable development by preventing and controlling marine pollution, reducing waste and promoting the energy revolution, so as to further enhance our ability of improving the shipping environment.
 44
Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
 We strengthen waste water management, especially the compliant discharge of ship oil and sewage, and strive to minimize the impact on water resources.
 We encourage research on environmental issues, and promote the technology innovation and application for environmental protection to empower our environmental protection actions.
 We apply green technologies in the full life cycle of shipbuilding, adjust the fleet structure, increase the proportion of green ships in the fleet, and improve the overall energy efficiency of the fleet.
   We set marine protection and conservation targets, and protect biodiversity by strictly controlling ship ballast water discharge, refusing to carry shark fin products, and using non-toxic ship paint.
   45

Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
  Improving Environmental Management
COSCO SHIPPING is fully aware of the importance of ecological conservation and our responsibility for green development as a cross-sector business group. To promote green development more effectively, we have prioritized environmental protection in Group management, established an environmental management mechanism with clearly-defined responsibilities and powers, and strengthened the Group's responsibilities in policy guidance and supervision and evaluation. A leading group has been set up to coordinate the phased implementation of environmental protection measures and provide a sound organizational guarantee for environmental management.
In addition, COSCO SHIPPING has formulated theRegulations on Management of Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction. Energy conservation, emission reduction and environmental protection are listed as binding indicators of the performance evaluation of all directly-administered units. We have also improved the performance evaluation mechanism to ensure long-term environmental management.
Meanwhile, we are actively sorting out and analyzing the factors and degrees of our environmental impact. We have compiled the Environmental Protection Inspection Standards and the Environmental Protection Corporate Information List and accordingly inspected our subsidiaries on environmental emergency response, on-site management of environmental pollution, and investigation and elimination of hidden environmental hazards. This multi-layer, full-coverage environmental impact management has been delivered on the ground.
Combating Climate Change
No company is immune to the threat of climate change. Our 6+1 industrial clusters have brought varying degrees of impact on the total carbon emission increase and climate change. We are working hard to identify and control the influencing factors by operational and technical means to help mitigate global climate change.
Advocating Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction
Energy saving and emission reduction has always been an important material topic in COSCO SHIPPING's efforts to combat climate change. In order to find a practical way to strengthen energy management and reduce pollutant emissions, we have formulated the Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction Management Regulations and launched scientific assessments addressing energy conservation and environmental protection targets. We guide subsidiaries to set reasonable targets and encourage them to accelerate progress towards the targets.
Case
Setting ambitious carbon emission reduction targets
  COSCO SHIPPING Energy has set environmental goals in accordance with international conventions such as the EU regulations on monitoring, reporting and verification of fuel consumption (EU MRV) and the International Maritime Organization fuel oil consumption data collection system (IMO DCS), as well as domestic regulations. Systematic energy data statistics are conducted to help improve energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emission in a target-oriented way.
    Energy intensity target:compared with 2015, to bring down the energy consumption per transport work of service vessels by 6% by 2020
Carbon emission intensity target:compared with 2015, to reduce the CO2 emissions during per transport work of service vessels by 7% by 2020
Short-term targets
Long-term targets
Total greenhouse gas emission target:compared with 2008, to decrease the total amount of greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50% by 2050, and to make continuous efforts to achieve zero greenhouse gas emissions
Carbon emission intensity target:compared with 2008, to reduce the carbon emission intensity of service vessels by at least 40% by 2030, and to reduce the carbon emission intensity by 70% by 2050
   Among COSCO SHIPPING's various segments, the shipping cluster has a relatively large environmental impact. Therefore, we have been working hard to improve ships' energy efficiency via technological innovation. In 2019, we increased investment in technology upgrade and environmental protection on ships, and promoted the energy efficiency management system to maximize the energy performance of each ship.
As of the end of 2019
  RMB 76.26 million
The Group's accumulated annual investment in
 energy conservation had reached
All ships had been equipped with the energy efficiency management system, effectively reducing the emission of greenhouse gases such as CO2.
RMB 667.52 million Environmental protection investment had reached
3.5 times
With the total investment year on year increasing by
 46
47

Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
  Supporting the Development of Clean Energy
The development of clean energy is an important task to improve energy mix, ensure energy security, and promote ecological conservation. Seizing the opportunities presented by the national call to accelerate energy revolution and develop the clean energy industry, COSCO SHIPPING actively explores LNG shipping and leads green shipping development.
As a leading LNG carrier in China, COSCO SHIPPING Energy regards the development of LNG shipping business as the "second development curve". It is an important clean energy arm of the Group. As of the end of 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Energy had formed a LNG fleet which is the biggest in China and one of the biggest in the world. It invested in the building of 38 ships, of which 35 were put into operation, with a total carrying capacity of 5.90 million cubic meters and a total deadweight of 2.78 million metric tons. In addition, the company has hosted the Shanghai LNG Forum for many years. The forum is a platform for the integration, exchange, and win-win development of upstream and downstream suppliers, to jointly promote the development of clean energy.
Case Providing flexible solutions to LNG storage and shipping
Reducing Emissions and Discharges
We have established a daily emission/discharge management and monitoring mechanism to track, sort and report on the types, sources, emission/discharge and recycling of exhaust gas, waste water and solid waste generated during production and operation. We also conduct on-site inspections on the treatment of VOCs (volatile organic compounds) and ship oil and sewage at key units to ensure compliant emissions/discharge and disposal.
The compliant waste treatment on oceangoing ships is one of our main tasks in solid waste management. We have formulated a detailed Waste Management Plan for each ship to regulate waste collection, processing, storage and emission/discharge. We urge ships to reduce the amount of waste generated at the source, promote waste recycling, and realize the, compliant, orderly, controllable and traceable waste treatment on each ship.
Case Promoting the development of the green offshore platform dismantling plan
   Offshore platforms are structures equipped with production and living facilities for offshore drilling, oil production, transportation, observation, navigation, construction and other activities. The abandoned offshore platform needs to be cleaned up before dismantling, which may produce waste water that contains crude oils, fuel oils or chemical agents. Furthermore, the traditional way of dismantling by cutting the platform into pieces also generates a large amount of solid waste, a source of maritime pollution that cannot be ignored.
Based on the results of the Research on the Offshore Platform Dismantling with Dual-Fuel Semi-Submersible Ships, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers has co-developed the demolition plan with dual-fuel semi-submersible ships in cooperation with Shanghai Jiao Tong University and DNV. Compared with the traditional way of dismantling, the new method makes it possible to dismantle the offshore platform as a whole and save the trouble of cutting it into pieces which might cause marine pollution. In May 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carriers won the bid for a US offshore platform demolition project with the technology.
 Traditional LNG shipping faces shortcomings such as limited pipeline mileage and network connectivity. Its efficiency is also checked by the change of carriers in the combined land-sea transportation modal. On March 7, 2019, COSCO SHIPPING (Qingdao) and Lianyungang Traffic Control Logistics Group co- launched the LNG tank container manufacturing project. LNG tank containers are flexible and suitable for storage and multi-modal transportation, making uninterrupted, door-to-door LNG shipping possible. They offer a flexible solution to LNG storage and shipping and expanding LNG import channels.
LNG tank containers are easy to stack, greatly reduce the non-effective weight of the containers, and protect the cryogenic liquid storage tanks inside. Hence, their use enjoys unparalleled advantages in every link of the natural gas industry
  4
4
8
8
4
49
9

Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
  Abiding by the IMO 2020 Global Sulphur Limit
Ship emissions have become a major source of air pollution in ports and seas around the world. In October 2016, the Maritime Environmental Protection Committee (MEPC) of the IMO confirmed that the 0.50% m/m limit for sulphur content of ship fuel will come into force on January 1, 2020. The IMO sulphur cap hopes to control sulphide content in the gas emissions of diesel engines, thereby reducing air pollution. The limit is considered to be the biggest change in the shipping industry in decades and indicates the rise of a new era of green revolution.
During 2019, in the transition towards the IMO sulphur limit, COSCO SHIPPING kept following the policy implementation, and released the IMO Sulphur Limit Update and Response Report . At the same time, based on the research and calculation of low-sulphur oil and desulphurization towers, the Group issued the Guidelines for the Use of Low-Sulphur Fuel Oil for Ships , and formulated a comprehensive plan for ship fuel and technology upgrade, striving to achieve orderly management and control of procurement, loading, installation, storage, use, emergency response and compliance with the IMO regulations.
Promoting Green Shipping
Green shipping has become the main theme of the development of the global shipping industry. We vigorously upgrade environmental protection equipment and promote energy conservation, emission reduction and pollution control on ships and at ports, to drive the green transformation of the industry.
Green Ships
We not only consider the environmental impact of ships during operation, but also apply green technology to the full life cycle of shipbuilding. The Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI) is an index used to estimate grams of CO2 per transport work in design. The index is set to encourage ship design companies, shipyards, and equipment manufacturers to improve energy efficiency and reduce CO2 emissions of ships.
In 2019, we focused on the green construction of ships such as very large crude carriers (VLCC) and very large ore carriers (VLOC) to lower their EEDI and improve the overall energy efficiency of the fleet.
Case
The world's first LNG dual-fuel VLCC
        Improving technological guarantee
Perfecting legal guarantee
         Carrying out key researches on such problems as the piston ring fracture of the main engine of ships caused by the fuel quality, and analyzing the ship scrubber market, to promote the related technology upgrade
Carrying out special legal risk investigation on the implementation of the IMO sulphur limit, and compiling the IMO 2020 sulphur limit legal risk prevention and response guidelines
                     Conducting special researches
Guaranteeing low-sulphur resources
    Conducting the Tracking Study on
the Implementation of the IMO 2020 Sulphur Limit by Shipping Companies to enrich the research results of maritime conventions
Signing framework agreements on the low- sulphur fuel oil supply guarantee, and completing the contract negotiation on the floating price of low-sulphur fuel oil with domestic and foreign fuel supply companies, to lay a foundation for the supply, quality and price guarantee of low-sulphur fuel oil
             COSCO SHIPPING's measures to observe the IMO regulations
In order to observe the IMO regulations in a proactive manner, COSCO SHIPPING Energy held seminars for brainstorming. It evaluated countermeasures, studied their feasibility, and invited external experts to provide special training. Based on the comprehensive industry information collected and assessed, it decided to shift to the use of low-sulphur fuel and reduce the environmental impact caused by the emission of sulphides. In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Energy checked the equipment status ship by ship and formulated countermeasures of ship cleaning and shift to low-sulphur fuel. At the same time, a special working group was set up and cross-departmental collaboration carried out to speed up the shift. As of December 30, 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Energy had replaced all high-sulphur fuel with low-sulphur fuel.
COSCO SHIPPING AQUARIUS whose device system reserved for the use of LNG fuel can meet the need for large-capacity LNG fuel tanks on specific routes
 50
51
On April 3, 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Energy and Dalian Shipbuilding Industry launched cooperation to build the world's first LNG dual-fuel VLCC. The use of LNG fuel is expected to reduce CO2 and NOx emissions by 20-30% and SOX emissions by 90-99%. The ship's NOx emissions will meet the latest IMO EEDI Tier III standards. The VLCC is expected to reform the design and shipbuilding standards, create new ways for liquid natural gas bunkering and new oil inspection standards, and set an example for energy conservation and emission reduction of large ships.

 G
G
r
r
e
e
e
e
n
nD
De
e
v
ve
el
l
o
o
p
pm
m
e
e
n
nt
t-
-
P
P
r
ro
o
t
te
ec
ct
t
i
in
n
g
gt
t
h
he
e
E
Ea
a
r
rt
th
h,
,B
Bl
l
u
u
e
eS
Se
ea
a
s
sa
a
n
nd
dS
Sk
k
i
ie
es
s
Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies
   Protecting Biodiversity
The shipping industry is closely related to marine biodiversity which might be harmed by our navigation or cargo. We have identified the risks of our ocean transportation and related businesses to marine biodiversity, and actively carried out biodiversity conservation actions.
Ship ballast water refers to the water and suspended substances added to the ship to control the ship's heel, trim, draught, stability and stress. In the process of sailing and cargo loading, it is often necessary to discharge or add fresh water or sea water to adjust the weight of ballast water on board in real time to ensure the safe and stable operation of the ship. If improperly discharged, the ballast water might bring alien organisms and pathogens in it to new waters, which will multiply and disrupt the balance of local water ecology, endanger aquatic life, and affect public health.
In 2004, the IMO formulated the International Convention for the Control and Management of Ships' Ballast Water and Sediments (hereinafter referred to as the BWM Convention ), which aims to prevent, reduce and eventually eliminate the risks caused by the transfer of harmful aquatic organisms and pathogens to the environment and human health. On October 22, 2018, China acceded to the BWM Convention , which officially came into force in China on January 22, 2019.
Before the BWM Convention came into effect, we had comprehensively collected and analyzed relevant industry information, assessed the feasibility of the response measures, and formulated the Cabin Ballast Water Management Instructions and the Ballast Water Management Plan . Through the operation, replacement, safety inspection and recording of ballast water, we strengthen management of ballast water, to lower the risk of alien organisms and pathogens contained in ship ballast water and sediments and the negative impact on marine biodiversity.
Case
Setting marine protection and conservation targets and putting biodiversity protection into action
  OOCL (International) is committed to the protection and sustainable use of ocean and marine resources for sustainable development. In addition to implementing the Group's Ballast Water Management Plan, OOCL (International) plans to have its regional offices participate in or organize more than 100 marine protection and conservation initiatives by 2030 or earlier.
As of the end of 2019
 58%
The marine protection and conservation plan of OOCL
(International) had completed
 Refusing to carry shark fin related products
Managing marine plastics
Floating plastics in oceans is one of the main sources
of pollution that threaten the marine environment and biodiversity. OOCL (International) complies with industry and regional marine plastics conventions and systems, carries out marine plastic management, and prevents marine plastics from leaking or entering the ocean during ship activities
Traditional ship paints may cause serious harms to marine biodiversity. OOCL (International) uses ship paints that do not contain tributyltin, and uses silicone antifouling paint for all newly built ships
OOCL (International)'s measures to protect biodiversity
Resolutely resisting related global trading activities of endangered and protected marine species, and promising to refuse to carry whales, sharks, dolphins and related products
                    Using non-toxic ship paint
Green Ports
Building green ports is an important way to improve the competitiveness of port logistics. We are committed to the green development of ports. We have launched the oil-to-electricity project and shore power transformation project to promote the use of clean energy, reduce emissions, and build ports with reasonable resource utilization, low energy consumption and low pollution.
5
52
Case
Promoting the use of clean energy to build green ports
As of the end of 2019
  COSCO SHIPPING Ports actively promotes the use of clean energy at terminals. It uses fully- or semi-electric tire-type gantry cranes which are low-carbon, less noisy, more energy efficient and cost saving, to replace traditional diesel- powered ones (the gantry crane refers to the boom crane installed on a fixed or mobile platform, mainly used for outdoor cargo loading and unloading). In 2019, Jinjiang Pacific Port, Nantong Tonghai Port and JNCT completed "oil-to- electricity" transformation for 16 gantry cranes, equivalent to reducing carbon emissions by nearly 200 metrics tons. In addition, Lianyungang New Oriental International Terminals Co., Ltd. (LNOIT) installed lithium batteries on two gantry cranes for gantry crane yard transfer operations.
 29 ports
The Group had completed the shore
power transformation
52 GWh
Saving a total of electricity
141.86%
The amount saved in the previous year
 2 53

 Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
Opening up
Sailing on the Maritime
Silk Road
  In our journey forward, we will keep firmly
to the path of peaceful development, pursue opening up for mutual benefits, and continue to build a community with a shared future for mankind with people around the world.
— Xi Jinping
 Shipping is an important link and bridge connecting the world for creating global value and enabling global trade and cultural exchange. COSCO SHIPPING remains open and inclusive with an enterprising spirit to lead the global shipping industry. We expand the global network, build logistics channels for China's integration into the global economy, and contribute to global connectivity and common economic development.
 54
Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
 In the process of globalization, COSCO SHIPPING upholds justice while pursuing shared interests, and is deeply involved in the implementation of the Belt and Road Initiative. By carrying out mutually beneficial cooperation with project areas, we seek to achieve win-win outcomes.
  55

Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
  Leading the Development of the International Shipping Industry
COSCO SHIPPING is aware of the necessity to deeply engage in global competition and resources allocation, expand the overall operational scale of the fleet, strengthen the construction of international hub ports, lay an efficient global service network, and strive to become a leader in the global shipping industry. Only by so doing can we better serve global trade and the stability of the global industrial chain.
Serving the Prosperity of Global Trade
COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes the construction of global trade channels, promotes the connectivity of the world economy, and contributes to the high-quality development of global economy and society.
Serving the Belt and Road Initiative
With a broad vision and open mind, COSCO SHIPPING is deeply involved in the Belt and Road construction. We are accelerating port investment and the development of ship transportation and comprehensive logistics in Belt and Road partner countries. We are also building a supply chain that combines shipping culture and logistics to strengthen people-to-people ties and win-win cooperation with partner countries. As of the end of 2019, COSCO Shipping had invested RMB 60.8 billion in Belt and Road partner countries.
Shipping Route Network
COSCO SHIPPING actively optimizes its global route network, improves the service quality of ship routes, and opens up the lifeline of maritime transport between China and the world. Currently, with Hong Kong, Japan, South Korea, Australia, Southeast Asia, West Asia, North America, South America, Europe, and Africa as radiation points, COSCO SHIPPING has built up a global maritime transportation network with more than 1,500 ship routes, covering major regions around the world.
Port and Terminal Network
COSCO SHIPPING actively expands its global network of terminals. We have been looking for suitable ports and terminals in Belt and Road partner countries as well as important nodes of global trade routes, and constantly enhance the control over terminal assets and the efficiency of terminal operations. We hope they will serve as the base for Chinese companies to participate in overseas infrastructure construction and industrial structure adjustment, and export high- quality production capacity. We also hope to achieve coordinated development of terminals, shipping logistics and upstream and downstream businesses of the industrial chain. At present, our terminal network covers China's five coastal port clusters, the core region of the middle and lower reaches of the Yangtze River, Southeast Asia, Europe, the Mediterranean, the Middle East and Central and South Americas. Our terminal operations are mainly based in China, but also see continuous growth in the international market.
In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Ports acquired 60% stake in the Port of Chancay, making it our first terminal project in South America. The deal is a milestone in our construction of global port network system.
COSCO SHIPPING Ports' Vado Gateway terminal in Italy
As of the end of 2019
Creating new pivots of ports and terminals
Taking terminals as the "connecting dots", COSCO SHIPPING actively builds key hub ports in Belt and Road countries to diversify its terminal portfolios across the world. As of the end of 2019, we had invested in 18 Belt and Road ports: the Port of Piraeus in Greece, the Kumport Terminal of Istanbul in Turkey, the Euromax Terminal Rotterdam in the Netherlands, the terminals of Antwerp and Zeebrugge in Belgium, the ports of Valencia and Bilbao in Spain, the Vado Terminal in Italy, the Marseille Fos Port in France, the CSP Abu Dhabi Terminal (CSP ADT) in the UAE, the Asia Container Terminal (ACT) and the Hong Kong International Terminal, Kao Ming Container Terminal (KMCT) and Port of Kaohsiung (TW KHH) in Taiwan, COSCO-PSA Terminal (CPT) in Singapore, the Port of Busan in South Korea, the Port of Port Said in Egypt, and the Port of Chancay in Peru.
 >160
The Group had established presence
in countries and regions
>1,500
the ocean shipping routes had
covered ports
61
We had invested in 61 terminals worldwide
including overseas terminals
  21
   5
56
6 57
COSCO SHIPPING SOLAR, the world's largest container ship, berths at the CSP ADT
As a key project of the Belt and Road Initiative, the CSP ADT in the UAE, COSCO SHIPPING's first overseas greenfield terminal project, started commercial trial operation in April 2019. In May 2019, it welcomed COSCO SHIPPING PISCES, the first 20,000 TEU container ship to unload at the Khalifa Port. The CSP ADT will further increase the throughput capacity and economic vitality of the Khalifa Port, making it an important competitive shipping hub in the Gulf region.

Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
  Building a new Maritime Silk Road for shipping
COSCO SHIPPING opens up the maritime cargo lifeline that links China and the rest of the world. In order to further promote the Belt and Road connectivity and optimize global shipping route network, we have successively opened liner routes in Europe, Asia and other regions. As of the end of 2019, we have a total carrying capacity of 1.96 million TEUs along the Belt and Road regions, accounting for 66% of the total container fleet.
The "Polar Silk Road" is a shipping route that crosses the Arctic Circle and connects the three major economic centers of North America, East Asia, and Western Europe. It has important social significance. In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Special Carriers continued normal services in the Arctic, and completed nine voyages on the Northeast Passage of the Arctic, reaching a record high. Since Yong Sheng's maiden Arctic voyage in 2013, COSCO SHIPPING had arranged 18 ships to complete 31 voyages to the Arctic Northeast Passage as of the end of 2019.
Opening new prospects for comprehensive logistics
COSCO SHIPPING strives to create smooth logistics channels and strengthen its weak link of cargo transportation at both ends of shipping. We improve extended onshore services such as logistics, warehousing, distribution, and connect the Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road seamlessly to facilitate the efficient and unimpeded trade of goods between China and the rest of world.
We have accelerated the construction of the "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line" with the Port of Piraeus in Greece as a hub in an effort to reach the hinterland of Central and Eastern Europe and open up a new logistics channel between China and Eastern Europe. In 2019, we signed contracts to buy equity of PEARL and BILK projects along the "China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line", adding to our asset portfolio on the Express Line, and laying a solid foundation for its accelerated development. The Express Line has completed a total cargo volume of 83,000 TEUs throughout the year, a year-on-year increase of 62%.
We strongly supported the construction of the New Western Land-Sea Trade Corridor and Hainan Free Trade Zone to expand the latter's business along the Corridor. We also support the initiative to turn China's inland and border areas into frontiers of opening up, and form an opening up pattern featuring land-sea and internal-external connectivity and east-west mutual assistance. As of the end of 2019, we had launched 11 container routes in Hainan, an increase of 6 from the beginning of the year, whose annual throughput reached 993,000 TEUs, an increase of 77% year on year, accounting for 37% of the total throughput of Hainan Province.
As of the end of 2019
1.96million TEUs Total capacity put in along the Belt
42
59.75 million tons
The annual oil shipping volume along the
 and Road
Domestic terminals involved along the Belt and Road
Foreign terminals involved along the Belt and Road
0.30million TEUs Provided the total shipping space
Belt and Road was
66%
accounting for the total container fleet
Provided cumulative liner services every week
18
75.49 million tons
The annual dry bulk shipping volume
 along the Belt and Road
 5
5
85
167
50.96%
of shipping space were invested in countries
every week
and regions along the Belt and Road
 8
5
9
9

Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
  Case President Xi Jinping and Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis visit the Port of Piraeus
  On November 11, 2019, Chinese President Xi Jinping and his wife Peng Liyuan, accompanied by Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis of Greece and his wife, visited the Piraeus Port, a project of COSCO SHIPPING. President Xi praised the Piraeus Port as a successful and excellent deliverable of the Belt and Road Initiative. In the future, COSCO SHIPPING will build the Piraeus Port into a bridge between China-Greece cultural and economic exchanges and make greater contributions to the people of both countries.
" The Piraeus Port project is a successful example of China-Greece cooperation featuring complementing each other's advantages, combining forces, and achieving mutual benefits. It is hoped that the two sides could make continued efforts to further construct and develop the port, achieve the goal of making the port a regional logistics distribution center, and advance the building of the China-Europe Land-Sea Express Line. I am confident in the unlimited prospects of the Piraeus Port, and believe that the fruits of the cooperation will continue to benefit the people of both countries and the region. I wish China-Greece cooperation constant and new achievements.
  In 2008
In 2010 In 2013
—Xi Jinping
COSCO SHIPPING took over the operation of No.2 and No.3 piers at Piraeus Port.
For the first time, the Piraeus Port was connected to Rail Europe and the route of the "China- Europe Land-Sea Express Line" was laid down. This route can save 7 to 10 days compared to the traditional route that passes through the Straits of Gibraltar and transits in ports in Northwest Europe.
In 2016
Based on our successful operation of the terminals at the Piraeus Port, COSCO SHIPPING acquired 67% equity of Piraeus Port Authority (PPA) at the price of 370 million Euros, becoming the operator of the whole port. Over the past decade, Piraeus Port has directly created 3,100 local jobs and indirectly over 10,000, and generated yearly revenue of 300 million Euros. At the same time, the port had rebounded from loss to pocket more than 70 million Euros in profits in 2018, benefiting local Greek employees.
COSCO SHIPPING obtained the franchise rights of No.2 and No.3 piers (under planning) at Piraeus Port.
 In 2019
On November 11, 2019, in the presence of President Xi Jinping and Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis, Chairman of COSCO SHIPPING Xu Lirong and Greek Minister of Shipping and Island Policy Ioannis Plakiotakis exchanged the Memorandum of Understanding on Successfully Implementing the Master Plan of Piraeus Port Authority S.A. on behalf of PPA S.A. and the Greek government at the Greek Prime Minister's Office.
The signing of the Master Plan marked that the investment plan of 600 million Euros has entered the implementation phase. Within the framework of the Master Plan, COSCO SHIPPING will further build the Piraeus Port into a Europe-leading 10-million-TEU transit port, a bridgehead for land-sea transportation, an international logistics distribution center, a ship repair center in the Mediterranean region and even across Europe, and the largest car transfer terminal in the Mediterranean.
60
61
"

             Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road
   Acquiring 60% stake in the Port of Chancay in Peru to drive China-Latin America trade growth
China and Latin America have enjoyed increasingly closer trade ties in recent years. In 2018, at the Second Ministerial Meeting of the Forum of China and the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), China and 33 CELAC member states issued a special statement regarding the Belt and Road Initiative as a new platform for China-CELAC cooperation, marking the official extension of the initiative to Latin America.
As one of the most economically-developed countries in CELAC, Peru is key to boosting China- CELAC trade again. On January 23, 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Ports officially signed the agreement with Volcan Compañía Minera S.A.A. (Volcan) to acquire 60% stake in the Port of Chancay, its first port investment and greenfield subsidiary in South America. As a newly built modern port, the Port of Chancay will become a connection point for China's friendly economic and trade exchanges with Peru and the CELAC.
" The signing of the closing certificate by companies from Peru and China is a milestone. The companies from China and Peru jointly invested and developed Chancay Project, which laid a solid foundation for Peruvian economic development, as well as trade cooperation between China and Peru. The construction of the Port of Chancay will contribute to the regional development and we expect to develop Port of Chancay into one of the most important hub ports in South America and logistics center near the Pacific Coast, which will promote the regional trade and the trade between China and the Latin America.
—Martín Vizcarra, President of Peru
Case
   Exploring Marine Equipment Manufacturing
COSCO SHIPPING continues to strengthen technological innovation, improve the level of technology and equipment for ocean exploration, and fully support the development of marine equipment manufacturing.
Building China's first 1,300-ton self-elevating and self-propelled wind farm installation vessel
Case
  In December 2019, Tie Jian Feng Dian 01, China's first 1,300-ton self-elevating and self-propelled wind farm installation vessel built by COSCO SHIPPING (Qidong) Offshore under COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry, was delivered for use, representing another grand project of offshore wind farm installation in China.
The ship was invested and built by CRCC Harbour and Channel Engineering Bureau Group Co., Ltd. (HCEB) and designed by the 708th Institute of China State Shipbuilding Corporation Limited. It is the first heavy-lift self-propelled wind power installation vessel independently designed, developed, and built by China. It only took only 16.5 months for COSCO SHIPPING (Qidong) Offshore to complete the design and overall shipbuilding, the shortest time for the construction of the same type of ships in China, demonstrating the company's domestic-leading and world-class shipbuilding capability.
    Case
The first independently developed pre-assembled combos of two- stroke diesel engine exhaust valves
         In September 2019, Nanjing International Marine Equipment & Spares Co., Ltd. (NIMES), a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING Heavy Industry, held a press conference to announce that its first assembled combos of independently developed two-stroke diesel engine exhaust valves had passed the bench test. This is the first time for the domestically-developed two-stroke diesel engine exhaust valves to be applied onboard a ship.
NIMES has undertaken the research project on the key technology of low-speed diesel engine exhaust valves for ships commissioned by the Ministry of Science and Technology since 2015. Defying various difficulties with arduous efforts, NIMES finally broke foreign technological monopoly and filled the gap in the domestic industry. The breakthrough is of great significance for improving China's independent ship supporting capabilities and promoting the development of the shipbuilding industry of China.
                                                               62
63
"

 Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
Sharing
Working Together for a Better Future
  The Chinese people have a passion for life and look forward to better education, more stable employment, higher income, more reliable social security, higher levels of medical and health services, more comfortable living conditions, and a more beautiful environment. They also want
a better life, better jobs for their children. The aspirations of the people to live a better life must
always be the focus of our efforts.
— Xi Jinping
 Shared development is the key to ensuring healthy and sustainable socioeconomic development. To fulfill the mission of becoming an excellent leader in the global shipping industry, COSCO SHIPPING always adheres to the philosophy of openness, cooperation, inclusiveness and sharing. Based on our advantages and resources, we help people to realize the goal of a better life and create a harmonious and win-win social community that enjoys sustainable development.
 64
Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
 We build a health and safety management system to better manage employee health, carry out rich cultural and sports activities and provide psychological counseling services to enhance the physical and mental health of employees.
 Based on the characteristics of different ranks and positions, we provide targeted and diversified training for employees to enhance their knowledge and skills and strengthen their comprehensive ability.
 In strict accordance with national laws and regulations, we say no to gender discrimination in employment, provide female employees with all-round care in work and life, and help them improve competitiveness.
 We protect the lawful rights of our employees, support their growth by stipulating reasonable working hours, clear growth plans and a comprehensive training system, and create a supportive working environment.
 We provide development assistance, including financial aid, to African countries, small-island developing countries and so on.
      65

 Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
S
-W
S
e
h
ha
a
r
ri
in
ng
g
-
W
o
or
r
k
ki
in
n
g
gT
T
o
og
ge
et
th
he
er
r
f
fo
o
r
ra
aB
Be
e
t
tt
te
e
r
rF
Fu
ut
tu
u
r
r
e
   Advancing with Employees
COSCO SHIPPING is fully aware that our development and success would not be possible without the joint efforts of employees. Therefore, we continue to optimize the management, training of and care for employees, and work hard to broaden the path of employee growth, in a bid to create a community of shared responsibility and interests so that employees can grow together with the Company and benefit from corporate development.
Employee Management
COSCO SHIPPING respects and protects the basic rights and interests of employees, and strictly abides by the Labor Law and other governing laws and regulations and labor policies. In 2019, on top of the "13th Five-Year" Staff Development Plan of COSCO SHIPPING , we further reformed the human resources management mechanism to build a team required for the international development of the Group.
• Continuing to deepen the reform of personnel development system and mechanism
• Implementing the "six-in-one" talent strategic management system, including recruitment configuration, career development, job management, performance management, education and training, and salary incentives
• Adopting public selection, open recruitment, competitive recruitment and other methods to create an open, fair and market-based recruitment environment
• Formulating the Outstanding Young Official Selection and Training Work Plan to support the selection of young talents
• Establishing an internal personnel flow system to fully tap the potential of talents
• Linking salary and benefits with profits, and creating a differentiated salary reward scheme
• Strictly regulating the salary performance assessment of professional managers based on market benchmarks
• Promoting equity incentive programs and further optimizing the Company's medium- and long-term incentive mechanism
• Formulating and implementing the Regulations on theDividend Incentive Management of the Group's Technology Companies
As of the end of 2019
 147,878
we had employees on the payroll
       Talent planning
Talent selection
Talent incentives
100% 100% 100%
2017 2018 2019 Labor contract signing rate
5.79%
36.10%
0.19% 1.87%
2.90%
         14.49%
Employees Composition by position
18.70% 26.70%
Employees by professional title
21,622
8,466
2017 2018 2019
Employees from Hong Kong, Macao, Taiwan and other parts of the world
       26.66%
35 and below 36-45
46-55
56 and above
31.45%
Employees by age group
Senior management
Senior technician or senior title
Intermediate management
51.70%
Intermediate technician
or intermediate title
Junior management
Junior technician or junior title
  Staff (and others)
No title or technical rank
           83.45%
        A competitive employee management mechanism
3,021
19.4% 20.4%
2017 2018 2019
Proportion of female employees
   100% 100%
100%
100% 100% 100%
2,320 1,804
18.1%
               2017 2018 2019 Social insurance payment rate
2017 2018 2019 Returning rate after
2017 2018 2019 Employees from minority groups
8,091
   maternity/parental leave
66 6
67
7

Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
  Employee Development
To become an excellent leader in the global shipping industry requires high-quality, international talents. According to the occupational characteristics and development needs of employees, COSCO SHIPPING has created a multi-level training model to provide the best support for employee growth.
01 02 03
To meet the career development needs of female employees, we have launched a series of training and educational activities to empower women and promote workplace equality and inclusion. In 2019, we launched a campaign to select the International Women's Day Red Flag Bearers and awarded a total of 52 individuals and 30 units. We recommended employees to compete for the National Model Posts and Model Contributors, and created a working environment that encourages competition, learning, catch-up and excellence, enabling female employees to achieve career development and excel themselves.
      Personalized professional training for key talents
• Strengthening the training and cultivation of high-level professional technical experts and high-skilled talents, to improve the overall quality of the talent team
• Carrying out professional training on Party building, to improve the theoretical knowledge of employees and the Party consciousness of officials
• Organizing the first special training for members of the board of directors, to strengthen their responsibility fulfillment abilities and the decision-making level of the board of directors
• Holding special workshops on the
SAP system and legal risk control, to strengthen information management and integration capabilities and improve risk control ability and compliance
• Setting up the COSCO SHIPPING Order Class, to achieve in-depth integration of university-enterprise cooperation and targeted training of crew talents
A Happy Workplace
Tiered training to meet the different career development needs in different periods
• Organizing centralized training
for newly recruited employees to enhance cohesion and promote cultural recognition and integration
• Recommending outstanding young officials to participate in the Group's Voyage training program and take temporary posts overseas, to improve their management skills and increase experience
• Selecting operational management and business backbones to participate in the Voyage program, to improve the professional competence and quality of personnel in key positions
• Organizing senior management personnel to participate in central trainings and trainings in well- known colleges and universities, to enhance their comprehensive leadership
Personalized professional training for key talents
• Carrying out international talent training by cooperating with well-known universities to organize a one-month centralized training for 33 middle-level management personnel from more than 20 countries and regions
• Promoting the cross-service
of senior management of the Company, and organizing two- way communications between employees from different fields
• Promoting the normalization and institutionalization of e-learning by building an online e-learning platform for COSCO SHIPPING and overseas employees
In 2019
 >2,600
We provided financial aid to
>RMB 15.7 million relief fund
We provided support to the children of financially disadvantaged employees and rural workers
>RMB 15.7 million gave out gifts worth
beneficiaries in need
RMB 196,000
300
RMB 936,100
relief money to model employees in difficulties
We also offered scholarships totaling
    In order to improve employees' sense of happiness and satisfaction with the workplace, we have organized a series of cultural and sports activities, such as the employee talent show, the employee art show, and the male employee basketball competition. We have also established four cultural and sports associations for literature, photography, calligraphy and philately, to enrich the cultural life of employees.
Caring for the Crew
Seafarers are the solid foundation for the development of the shipping industry. However, the job comes with great physical and mental stress as they are required to spend much time onboard. Therefore, we strive to improve the working and living environment, and constantly improve the crew management system to create a sound environment for their development.
Case Formulating the "Caring for the Crew" action plan in the interests of seafarers
In order to enhance the crew's sense of gain and happiness, we reformed the crew compensation system in 2019 and formulated and implemented a crew compensation adjustment plan based on a thorough survey, to share the dividends of reform with employees. At the same time, we implement the national regulations on the reduction and exemption of personal income tax for seafarers, making sure that our seafarers can benefit from policies and see their income increase.
In addition to the improvement of the salary system, we also attach great importance to the mental health of seafarers. We have compiled the ABCs of Mental Health at Sea manual and opened a crew counseling room for the mental health of seafarers.
  68
69
The employee art show for celebrating the 70th anniversary of the founding of the People's Republic of China
Team COSCO SHIPPING participating in the 5th National Seafarers Skill Competition
In 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Energy formulated the "Caring for the Crew" action plan, which aims to improve the living and working environment for seafarers by providing better remuneration, supporting career development, caring for seafarers' life.

Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
  Jointly Creating the Future of the Community
Enterprises and society have shared interests under harmonious coexistence. As a responsible enterprise, we proactively factor in the development needs of project areas. We actively participate in charity activities, conduct maritime rescues, and integrate into community development, as our way to give back to society, so as to realize continuous prosperity both for the company and society.
Community Engagement
Enterprises are an important part of society. We care about the needs of various social groups and encourage employees to participate in activities such as community charity and donations to give back to the society and share development results with others.
COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation
COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation is committed to carrying forward the national spirit, devoting COSCO SHIPPING's benevolence, supporting charitable causes, and promoting social harmony and development. The Foundation actively fulfills corporate social responsibilities by carrying out disaster relief, poverty alleviation, educational aid, and other charity activities.
In addition, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation has achieved full score in the Foundation Transparency Index (FTI) by the China Foundation Center for seven consecutive years. The Foundation takes the initiative to disclose donation information in a responsible, timely, accurate and transparent way.
The "Sailing to the Blue Sea" summer camp organized by COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation
In 2019
Environment protection
Raising employees' environmental awareness, encouraging employees to participate in environmental protection activities such as tree planting and public welfare marathon, guiding them to live a green, low-carbon, healthy and civilized lifestyle, and advocating them to start small, to build an ecological home for all
         RMB 78.49 million COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation
raised from donations
Education support
Sending volunteers and donating books, audio-visual classroom equipment, and educational materials to remote and poor areas, to provide poor students with educational opportunities
Volunteer services
Guiding employees to actively participate in community development activities, and contribute to building a harmonious and happy community by organizing blood donation, community services, etc.
Providing comprehensive volunteer services for the 2nd CIIE
          RMB 102 million spent on charity causes
organized charity projects
By the end of the year
the Foundation had organized charity projects
RMB 703 million donated accumulatively
80
      600
 Voyage · Chasing Dreams
Voyage · Home
The "Setting Sail for Dreams" volunteer teacher program
      Paying attention to educational charity by helping improve local basic education facilities and supplementing teachers
Participating in targeted poverty alleviation projects in Tibet and other areas
   Voyage · Silk Road
To train doctors in designated poverty alleviation areas on practical skills of traditional Chinese medicine, improve the level of diagnosis and treatment, and inherit excellent culture. To carry out activities to assist the disabled in poverty alleviation area. Pay attention to the health of ocean-going crew and other special occupational groups, and carry out relevant public welfare activities
Voyage · Disaster Relief
Paying attention to major global natural disasters and helping affected people rebuild their homes
Voyage · Health
       Assisting the implementation of the Belt and Road Initiative by actively carrying out public welfare activities in regions and countries along the Belt and Road
Voyage · Green Development
Paying attention to environmental protection by cooperating with social organizations to carry out ecological research and project implementation of marine environmental protection
The "Loving the Source of Life" beach cleanup volunteer activity
70
71

Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future
  Maritime Rescue
In the spirit of humanitarianism, COSCO SHIPPING has participated in many maritime rescues. In 2019, we participated in 36 maritime rescue operations and rescued 104 seafarers.
CSR Fulfillment Overseas
COSCO SHIPPING actively promotes regional economic prosperity. While promoting the regional economic development, we actively shoulder social responsibilities by supporting local industrial and educational development and spreading the positive influence of charity to achieve common regional prosperity.
  January 31
The CR POWER 7 ship of the associated company of COSCO SHIPPING Bulk ship helped rescue 11 crew members in distress in the middle of the Yellow Sea.
2019
December 13
On the way to the Port of Buenaventura in the Republic of Colombia, COSCO SHIPPING's TIAN CHANG HE ship rescued five fishermen on board a fishing boat in distress, which was highly praised by the local port and the fishing company.
COSCO SHIPPING's active participation in maritime rescue to ensure maritime safety
March 10
COSCO SHIPPING Specialized Carrier's LURSSEN ship rescued four crew members in distress at Jinzhou Port after nearly 4 hours of effort.
May 10
COSCO Shipping Lines' XIN LIAN YUN GANG ship helped rescue five crew members in distress along the coast of Fuzhou.
May 24
COSCO SHIPPING Lines' XIN FU ZHOU ship rescued a distressed fisherman who had been on the sea for 11 days near the Haitan Islands in Fujian.
July 11
COSCO Shipping Energy's YUAN YANG HU ship and YE CHI ship helped rescue 32 crew members from wrecked fishing vessels.
Enhancing China-Japan Cultural Exchanges
The "XIN JIAN ZHEN" vessel owned by China-Japan International Ferry Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of COSCO SHIPPING, shipped the exhibits of A Blessing over the Sea: Cultural Relics on Jianzhen and Murals by Higashiyama Kaii from Toshodaiji to be displayed at the Shanghai Museum. The service was of profound significance as it pays tribute to Master Jianzhen's six trips to Japan, and moreover, reminds and carries forward the historical and cultural bonds between China and Japan.
 XIN JIAN ZHEN ship
In November 2019, COSCO SHIPPING Charity Foundation donated 500,000 Euros (or RMB 3.9 million) to the Hellenic Red Cross for students from low-income families in Athens and Piraeus. The fund will reward high-performing high school graduates with scholarships to pay for the costs of college entrance examinations and sponsor 30 cultural and sports charity activities for children aged 6 to 16. This one-year project is expected to benefit more than 2,100 people.
Supporting the Development of Madagascar's Fishing Industry
In December 2019, DA TONG YUN heavy-lift vessel, one of the COSCO SHIPPING's "Da II" types, transported six fishing vessels with a single weight of 150 metric tons and a total weight of 900 metric tons to Madagascar, Africa, to support local fishery production.
        Providing Educational Funds for Athens and Piraeus
                         72
73
September 5
COSCO SHIPPING Bulk's YUAN SHEN HAI ship successfully rescued 23 crew members of a fishing boat in distress in the sea near Chengshantou, Weihai, after overcoming poor visibility, heavy winds and high waves, and was awarded the Maritime Search and Rescue Bravery Award.

 O
In
0
u
n
t
lo
o
v
o
a
k
fo
tio
n
-
S
r
2
0
2
t
0
O
im
ulating Momentum for Continued Progress
Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Con
Development for All
COSCO SHIPPING is committed to achieving common development with employees and society and sharing a better life with them. Focusing on the improvement of talent management, we will create an inclusive and equal workplace and smooth career development channels for employees, organize rich cultural and sports activities, and care for employees' physical and mental health and wellbeing. As our response to social development needs, we will continue to invest in education, health, environmental protection and other areas. We will carry forward the spirit of humanitarianism and use our advantages to conduct maritime rescue. In addition, we will fulfill CSR proactively in overseas project areas and share the future development fruits with the whole community.
Outlook for 2020 Innovative Development
COSCO SHIPPING will resolutely seek development driven by innovation and transformation, foster a culture that encourages innovation, and cultivate innovators who dare to explore, to help build an agile and innovative corporate ecosystem. We will carry out open cross-industry cooperation with stakeholders, strengthen the development and transfer of smart shipping technologies, and accelerate the application and iteration of new shipping technologies, so as to promote the construction of a new and innovative shipping industry ecosystem. Embracing the fourth industrial revolution, we will promote the in-depth integration of shipping factors with information technology, AI and other high-tech technologies, to develop an efficient, convenient, healthy and orderly modern shipping service industry represented by smart ships, smart services, smart logistics and smart ports.
Coordinated Development
COSCO SHIPPING will pursue coordinated and common development, take into account both internal and external development needs, and explore a harmonious relationship that advocates co-existence and common prosperity. While safeguarding the safety red line, we will seek out and eliminate hidden safety hazards based on solid safety management. We will continue to achieve quality development and optimize resource allocation and service processes based on customer
experience. In pursuit of win-win cooperation, we will continue to optimize the performance of suppliers in sustainability and cultivate industry talents to create new value for the prosperity of the industry. We will continue to share our terminals, routes and other networks with stakeholders. At the same time, we will strive to transform from "a global carrier" to "shipping for the whole world" so as to help realize coordinated regional development across the world.
Green Development
COSCO SHIPPING will put ecological conservation first and pursue green development. We will formulate more environmental management policies and identify and manage environmental impacts in a more targeted way. We will actively combat climate change by promoting the adoption of energy- saving and environmental protection technologies and the management of energy-saving and emission-reduction targets, and accelerating the improvement of energy-saving emission- reduction performance. We will consolidate our status as China's leading LNG carrier, expand the LNG fleet, and further explore innovative solutions for LNG storage and transportation. We will build a green fleet and reduce waste water, exhaust gas and solid waste emanated from ships and ports. In addition, we will observe the IMO regulations in a proactive manner and promote the use of low-sulfur fuel and related technological upgrade. We will also strictly control ship ballast water discharge and encourage diversified management of marine
protection and conservation goals, to contribute to the global marine ecological and environmental protection.
Open Development
COSCO SHIPPING will remain open with a broad vision. We will actively improve our global network and create logistics channels for China's integration into the global economy, so as to provide important support for the "going global" of the Chinese economy, global connectivity and common economic development. We will take the initiative to fulfill the mission of globalization and take advantage of our global network and resources to build up China's influence in the international shipping market and contribute more to the common and sustainable development of the Group, the industry, as well as regional economy inside and outside China.
7
7
4
47
t
u
in
t
lo
u
e
o
d
P
k
fo
ro
r
2
g
r
0
e
2
s
75
s
    5

Expert Insights
Expert Insights
  Expert Insights
After reading the Sustainability Report 2019 of China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited, I am excited to find that COSCO SHIPPING always integrates its own development into the development of the whole shipping industry. It bears in mind social and environmental responsibilities during management and operation, and does all it can to contribute to the sustainable socioeconomic development of China and the world as a whole.
Sharing the same future with the country.Looking back on the history of COSCO SHIPPING, it can be said that it was born and developed alongside with the PRC and continued to advance in the new era. As the industry pacesetter, it has been deeply involved in the seventy-year journey of the shipping industry of China, witnessing the country sailing from offshore to ocean and growing from a late-comer to a leader on the international stage, and has experienced the profound changes brought by China's reform and opening up over the past forty years and opened a glorious chapter in the country's flourishing shipping industry with hard work.
Keeping pace with the times and striving for excellence.Under the headings of "Innovation - Stimulating Momentum for Continued Progress", "Coordination - Coordinating Forces for Sustainable Development", "Green Development - Protecting the Earth, Blue Seas and Skies", "Opening up - Sailing on the Maritime Silk Road", and "Sharing - Working Together for a Better Future", this report discloses COSCO SHIPPING's CSR practices and performance in its pursuit of the vision of innovative, coordinated, green, and open development that is for everyone, and demonstrates the Group's strong commitment to making improvement to meet the development needs and follow the trend of the times and continue down the path of responsibilities. Meanwhile, responding to special topics of the times and social hotspots, the report also comprehensively discloses COSOCO SHIPPING's poverty alleviation management and what it has done and achieved in infrastructure construction, health care, education, industry, employment, consumption, and other areas, showcasing its unswerving efforts to help the country win the battle against poverty and build a moderately prosperous society in all respects.
Setting sail with responsibilities in mind. The SDGs outline a clear blueprint for a sustainable future, and places higher expectations on enterprises to facilitate the realization of the SDGs with their resources and capabilities. As a globally oriented company, COSCO SHIPPING gradually incorporates SDGs into corporate development to contribute to the realization of the SDGs. In this report, COSCO SHIPPING evaluates the SDGs by criticality and importance and accordingly divides them into primary SDGs and relevant SDGs, so that it can take corresponding CSR actions based on the relevance of each goal. This move shows its efforts to integrate SDGs into the whole process of corporate value creation and to build a bright future for sustainable development together with stakeholders.
What's past is prologue. Standing at a new starting point, I hope that COSCO SHIPPING will always remember why it started, accomplish its mission, pursue high-quality and sustainable development, provide better services for global customers, and create greater value.
Secretary of ISO 26000 Stakeholder Global Network Founder and Chief Expert of GoldenBee
Yin Gefei
The world is undergoing profound changes unseen in a century, with mounting economic, social and environmental pressures on the international community. In this context, sustainability becomes the "golden key" to current global issues as well as the reason for different parties to coming together for common interests and cooperation. I'm glad to find in the Sustainability Report 2019 COSCO SHIPPING's unremitting and active practices regarding sustainable development and the enormous efforts and contribution in implementing the UN SDGs.
Living up to the expectations of both internal and external stakeholders. The report offers a panoramic view of how COSCO SHIPPING uses its expertise and resource advantages to facilitate global connectivity and unimpeded trade, provide better services to global socioeconomic development, and continue to create economic, social and environmental values in project areas. In the five chapters and two CSR focuses, the report responds to the expectations and demands of customers, employees, communities, the environment and other stakeholders. The Group embraces the intelligent development of the shipping industry, pursues the common prosperity and development of the industry and the value chain, protects marine ecology, connects the global economy and grows with employees and communities with concepts of new development, demonstrating COSCO SHIPPING's commitment to its original aspiration and mission as a world-leading shipping company.
Meeting international standards and the SDGs. This report benchmarks against the GRI Standards issued by the Global Sustainability Standard Board (GSSB). Focusing on nineteen material topics with industry and corporate features, the report discloses the CSR progress of the Group from the perspectives of sustainability background, management approaches and CSR practices. In response to the SDGs, COSCO SHIPPING also incorporates the SDGs into the corporate development philosophy as well as its operation and management, concentrates resources and expertise to help achieve primary SDGs, and by so doing, contributes its share to sustainable development. Such moves reflect the Group's broad heart and vision to fulfill social responsibilities.
Convincing and reader-friendly. While inheriting the merits of previous reports, this report is written clearly and concisely, inlaid with pictures, charts, typical cases, and comments from stakeholders, presenting a complete and grand CSR fulfillment picture to make readers feel the CSR power of COSCO SHIPPING.
Behind a detailed, concise, data-supported and beautifully designed report is the CSR commitment of the Group. I wish COSCO SHIPPING can build on past achievements while making fresh efforts to innovate and explore in sustainability, keep ahead and make a sound in the sustainable development of the global shipping industry, and contribute China's part to building a community with a shared future for mankind.
Deputy Director of the Employers Work Department of China Enterprise Confederation Han Bin
76
77

GRI Content Index
GRI Content Index
  GRI Content Index
102-2 Activities, brands, products, and services 102-4 Location of operations
102-6 Markets served
102-8 Information on employees and other workers
102-11 Precautionary Principle or approach
102-14 Statement from senior decision-maker
102-17 Mechanisms for advice and concerns about ethics
102-40 List of stakeholder groups
102-43 Approach to stakeholder engagement
Our Vision
Global Routes & Ports Our Vision
Employee Management
Risk Management
Message from Chairman
Business Integrity and Compliance
Stakeholders Communication and Engagement
Stakeholders Communication and Engagement
102-45 Entities included in the consolidated financial statements 102-47 List of material topics
102-52 Reporting cycle
102-54 Claims of reporting in accordance with the GRI standards
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
203-2 Significant indirect economic impacts
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
302-1 Energy consumption within the organization
About this Report Analysis of Material Topics
About this Report
About this Report, GRI Content Index
CSR Focus II - Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
CSR Focus II - Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished
Business Integrity and Compliance
  Organizational profile
Strategy
Ethics and integrity
Governance
Stakeholder engagement
Indicator
Position
Indicator
GRI 102:General Disclosures 2016
Position
    102-46 Defining report content and topic Boundaries
About this Report
  102-1 Name of the organization
GRI 102: General Disclosures 2016
102-50 Reporting period
About this Report
102-3 Location of headquarters
Overview
102-53 Contact point for questions regarding the report
Reader Feedback
102-5 Ownership and legal form
Overview
102-7 Scale of the organization
Employee Management
 102-9 Supply chain
Building a Harmonious Supply Chain
102-12 External initiatives
Industry Exchanges and Cooperation
 102-16 Values, principles, standards, and norms of behavior
Overview, Business Integrity and Compliance
102-18 Governance structure
Overview
102-42 Identifying and selecting stakeholders
Stakeholders Communication and Engagement
 78
79
102-44 Key topics and concerns raised
Overview
Stakeholders Communication and Engagement
Reporting practice
Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
102-55 GRI content index
GRI 203:Indirect Economic Impacts 2016
203-1 Infrastructure investments and services supported
GRI 205:Anti-corruption 2016
205-2 Communication and training about anti-corruption policies and procedures
GRI 302:Energy 2016
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
302-5 Reductions in energy requirements of products and services
GRI Content Index
CSR Focus II - Taking Well-targeted Steps to Bring a Better Life to the Impoverished, Driving Regional Development
Business Integrity and Compliance
Advocating Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction, Supporting the Development of Clean Energy, Abiding by the IMO 2020 Global Sulphur Limit, Green Ships, Green Ports
Figures in 2019
Advocating Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction, Green Ships, Green Ports

GRI Content Index
Reader Feedback
  Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
Management Approach
Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
Management Approach
Management Approach
Specific Topic Disclosures
Management Approach
401-3 Parental leave
Indicator
GRI 304:Biodiversity 2016
304-2 Significant impacts of activities, products, and services on biodiversity
GRI 308:Supplier Environmental Assessment 2016
GRI 401:Employment 2016
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
GRI 403:Occupational Health and Safety 2016
GRI 404:Training and Education 2016
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
GRI 414:Supplier Social Assessment 2016
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
Protecting Biodiversity
Employee Management
Employee Management
Employee Development
Position
Building a Harmonious Supply Chain
   103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
401-2 Benefits provided to full-time employees that are not provided to temporary or part-time employees
103-1 Explanation of the material topic and its Boundary; 103-2 The management approach and its components; 103-3 Evaluation of the management approach
404-2 Programs for upgrading employee skills and transition assistance programs
Reader Feedback
We sincerely look forward to your comments and suggestions and will carefully read and analyze the feedback of every recipient of this Sustainability Report 2019 of China COSCO SHIPPING Corporation Limited . Your comments and suggestions are an important basis for the continuous improvement of our CSR management and practices. Please feel free to fill in the following form, detach it, and send it to us by mail or fax. We sincerely welcome and appreciate your highly valued advice!
Protecting Biodiversity
Building a Harmonious Supply Chain
Employee Management, A Happy Workplace, Caring for the Crew
Improving Safety Management Efficiency, Strengthening Safety Risk Prevention and Control, Enhancing Employees' Safety Awareness, Fostering an Enabling Environment for Safety Research
Employee Development
Your information
Name:
Telephone:
1. Your overall evaluation of COSCO SHIPPING's social responsibility performance: □ Very good □ Good □ Fair □ Poor
2. Your overall evaluation of this report:
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair □ Poor
3. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in communication with stakeholders?
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair □ Poor
4. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in fulfilling economic responsibility?
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair □ Poor
5. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in fulfilling environmental responsibility? □ Very good □ Good □ Fair □ Poor
6. What do you think of COSCO SHIPPING's performance in fulfilling social responsibility?
□ Very good □ Good □ Fair □ Poor
7. Do you think the content and layout of this report help you read?
□ Yes □ No
8. What other information to your concern is not disclosed in this report?
9. What are your comments and suggestions on COSCO SHIPPING's fulfillment of social responsibility and this report as a whole?
Organization: E-mail:
  80
81


  01 Messages from Senior Managers
China Shipping (Group) Company

   About This Report 01
 About This Report
Overview
Dear stakeholders, this is the fourth corporate social responsibility (CSR) report released by China Shipping (Group) Company. This report describes our concepts, strategies and management approaches to sustainability, and also elaborates on our efforts and achievements in fulfilling economic, safety, environmental, employee and community commitments as well as the comments of stakeholders.
Compilation Principles
This report is prepared in accordance with the Guidelines to Central Enterprises
on Fulfilling Corporate Social Responsibilities released by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission (SASAC) of the State Council, the Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (G3.1) of the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) and the Chinese CSR Report Preparation Guide (CASS-CSR 3.0) of Chinese Academy of Social Sciences. The latest version of Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (G4) is also consulted to strengthen the disclosure of management approaches.
Reporting Period
This report covers the period between January 1 and December 31, 2014, with some content and data dating back to earlier years.
Release Frequency
The report is released annually.
Reporting Scope
This report covers information about all tier-1 subsidiaries, some tier-2 subsidiaries, shareholding companies and joint ventures of China Shipping (Group) Company.
Data Source
Data in this report is derived from in-house documents and related statistics of China Shipping (Group) Company.
References
For readability purposes, any reference to “China Shipping”, “the Group”, or “we” in this report refers to China Shipping (Group) Company.
Accesses to this Report
This report is available in both Chinese and English. In case of discrepancy between the two versions, the Chinese version shall prevail.
To download this report, please visit our company website at www.cnshipping.com. If you need a hard copy of this report or wish to voice your opinions on its content, please contact China Shipping (Group) Company at:
Addr.: No.678 Dongdaming Rd, Shanghai Tel.: 86-21-65967600
Fax: 86-21-65966348
Email: csr@cnshipping.com
 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

   02 Contents
Contents
 04 Messages from Senior Managers 08 About China Shipping
14 CSR Management
27 Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
28 Focus: Setting Up the Work Safety Monitoring
System to Ensure Long-term Safety
30 Nipping Risks in the Bud
31 Building Safety-oriented Teams
33 Safeguarding Smooth Navigation at Sea
35 A Trustworthy Carrier of Special Goods and Materials
       China Shipping (Group) Company
19
Achieving Excellence with Integrity
20 Focus: Driving Regional Cooperation under the "One Belt and One Road" Initiative
22 Creating Outstanding Value for Customers
24 Supporting Regional Economic Development
26 Seeking Common Progresses with the Industrial Chain

  47 Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
48 Focus: Reform of Crew Management System, a
New Chapter of Institutional Development
50 Attracting Talents to the China Shipping Family 51 Facilitating Talent Development
55 Caring about Employees
70 Outlook 2015
72 Expert Comment 74 Benchmark
76 Appendix
79 Feedback Form
Contents 03
              37 Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
38 Focus: CSCL Globe's Maiden Voyage Ushered
in a New Trend of Low-carbon Large Vessel
40 Optimizing the Environmental Management System 41 Driving Green Production
44 Realizing Green Sailing
46 Advocating Green Office
61 Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen 62 Focus: MH370 Salvage
64 Shouldering Responsibilities in Times of Disaster 65 Contributing to Regional Development
67 Engaging in Public Welfare
69 Performing CSR as a Global Citizen
  2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

   04 Messages from Senior Managers
Messages from Senior Managers Message from the Chairman
 Xu Lirong
Chairman of the Board and Party Secretary of China Shipping (Group) Company
China Shipping (Group) Company

  For a long time, central enterprises have played a leading role in ensuring steady socioeconomic development and enhancing the level of production and standard of living. For China Shipping, CSR is not only a moral responsibility, but also a proper task of central enterprises. We have integrated CSR into our strategy and DNA, striving for the alignment of economic and social values.
In 2014, the “One Belt and One Road” initiative attracted worldwide attention. As an international shipping and logistics enterprise, we have firmly seized the development opportunities brought by the New Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. We have created new modes of logistics services, stepped up the expansion of sea-rail transport business, spurred the development of overseas terminal projects, and promoted the construction of safe and environment- friendly fleets, adding impetus, contents and advantages to the “One Belt and One Road” construction.
Given the “new normal” of economic development, we have based our pluralistic strategy on our major business - shipping. The establishment of China Shipping (South America) Holding Co., Ltd. signals our commanding presence in all continents and an optimized global marketing and service network. The shift of focus of our business mode from traditional shipping to industrial chain will lead to the formation of an “eco-chain” where various business segments and stakeholders can exist and grow together. In addition, the further integration of industry and finance on the strength of market research and project development is lifting our sustainable financial business to the status of economic mainstay and new engine.
Safety management has always been a top priority for our production and operation. The Group
and our major branches and subsidiaries have been equipped with independent safety monitoring departments. Our workplace safety monitoring mechanism ensures the full implementation of the responsibility system for workplace safety and the standardization of production for the sake of personal and property safety of employees and customers. Meanwhile, we are pressing ahead with the reform towards unified crew management, which is conducive not only to efficiency and crew’s interests, but also to the building of vigorous and cohesive teams. We continue to ramp up support for less developed areas in forms of education and entrepreneurship advocacy on top of capital input, injecting an adrenaline into regional sustainable development. By successively engaging 24 ships in the search of MH370 immediately upon request of China Maritime Search and Rescue Center, we have fulfilled our responsibility as a central enterprise in times of emergency.
The maiden voyage of CSCL Globe marks the phased success of “big ship, low carbon” strategy. We have also made a decisive step in the application of liquefied natural gas (LNG) and other new energy. Such achievements, coupled with “green ships”, streamlined fleet structure and standardized port operation, indicate our all-round commitment to environmental performance.
The year 2015 will witness the final spurt to our 12th Five-Year Plan and the run-up to our 13th Five- Year Plan. As an integral part of our farsighted, holistic international strategy, CSR will be further integrated with corporate restructuring, comprehensive customer services, and safe and green development so that we can create greater overall value for stakeholders.
At this juncture, we will take pains with innovation and reform, bear the weight of responsibilities, and accelerate the integration of CSR ideology into daily operation. It is our firm belief that, with the support of all stakeholders, China Shipping will channel corporate sustainability into greater contributions to national development and people’s wellbeing.
Messages from Senior Managers 05
   2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

   06 Messages from Senior Managers
Message from the President
 Zhang Guofa
Director, President and Party Committee Member of China Shipping (Group) Company
China Shipping (Group) Company

  In 2014, the sluggish recovery of world economy and the superimposition of “three periods” in China dragged shipping markets into the doldrums. However, China Shipping and our employees managed to trudge through domestic and international challenges and made new achievements. Over the year, we clocked up a cargo turnover of 1.06 trillion ton miles, up 13.2% YoY, and an operating income of RMB 83.065 billion, up 21.4% YoY. By offering better services to customers, we helped promote the commercial intercourse between countries/regions.
Upholding the core values of “keeping honest and trustworthy, striving for excellence” and eyeing a strategic global layout, we have constantly improved corporate management, revved up fleet restructuring, enhanced supply chain integration, steadily promoted pluralistic development, opened a new vista for international operation, took an important step from traditional shipping
to new business modes, built up corporate sustainability and laid a solid foundation for future development.
Regarding safety as the premise of stable business development, we have established the workplace safety monitoring mechanism, strengthened hazard identification, improved employees’ safety skills and introduced ships with optimal safety performance, thus preventing the occurrence of serious shipping accident, protecting the safety of employees and guaranteeing the economic rights and interests of customers.
Considering environmental protection our own responsibility, we have optimized the environmental stewardship system, retrofitted ships with new processes, products and techniques, made our offerings more eco-friendly, and called for employee engagement in building green offices for the purpose of harmonious co-existence between man and nature.
Cherishing employees as our most valuable assets, we have vigorously promoted the reform
of crew management system. In addition to creating a comfy, safe work environment, we have expanded the career paths and ignited the enthusiasm and vitality of employees so that they can grow with the Group.
Keen on sharing our achievements with the whole society, we have invested heavily in poverty- stricken areas for years, encouraged employee volunteers to support vulnerable groups, and proactively engaged in the building of overseas communities on our doorstep, all of which have contributed to our image as a responsible enterprise.
Looking into the future, we will keep forging ahead and proactively assume the greater undertakings in new conditions. Together with our partners, we will keep employees’ rights
and interests in mind, safeguard our green homeland, perform our social responsibilities, take corporate sustainability up a notch, and in turn contribute to the sustainable development of the entire world.
Messages from Senior Managers 07
   2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  08
About China Shipping
About China Shipping Company Profile
Headquartered in Shanghai, China Shipping (Group) Company was established on July 1, 1997. The Group is one of the major State-owned backbone enterprises under the direct administration of the central government and is a super-large conglomerate with business in shipping, logistics, manufacturing, finance and terminals and supply.
China Shipping is mainly engaged in container, tanker, freight, passenger transport, car carriers and special transportation. We are also rapidly expanding LNG services. By supplementing shipping with a number of business segments, including terminal operation, integrated logistics, shipping agency, universal airfreight, shipbuilding and maintenance, container manufacturing, crew management, supply and trading, financial and investment, and information technology, we have established a complete industry system consisting of upstream and downstream companies in the shipping industry.
Our global presence is reinforced by branches in nearly 100 countries/regions, 7 shareholding companies in Hong Kong, North America, Europe, Southeast Asia, West Asia, South America and Africa. Currently, we are operating more than 100 overseas subsidiaries, agencies and representative offices as well as 400-plus business outlets.
 1.0554 533 83.065 3.06
102 76.56%
Cargo turnover amounted to 1.0554 trillion ton nautical miles Cargo transport totaled 533 million tons
Operating income was about RMB 83.065 billion
Total profit registered RMB 3.06 billion, indicative of another year in the black
Shipping
More than 80 domestic and international container routes covered 102 countries/regions around the world
coastal crude oil market share stayed at 76.56% ▲ Key achievements of China Shipping in 2014
       China Shipping (Group) Company

  Business Segment in 2014
About China Shipping 09
        ▲ CSCL
Iron ore
▲ CSTANKER
▲ CSBULK
▲ CSPD
▲ CSL
      Crude oil
    Steel
Polyester
  Automobiles
Apparel
Household appliances
        Wheat
Soya beans
Construction machinery
Newspapers and magazines
 Liquid crystal glass
       Pulp
Food
Town gas
Stainless steel
Semiconductors
Silica sand
   Wood chips
   LNG
Nickel
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Under Company

  10 About China Shipping Raw Materials
Main Cargo
Energy
Crude oil, naphtha, natural gas, etc.
Resources
Iron ore, coal, nickel, bauxite, timber, sawdust, etc.
Food
Soybean, wheat, corn ,etc.
Means of Transport
Tanker, LNG carriers, dry bulk carrier
Intermediate Goods
Main Cargo
Intermediate materials and products
Et Fuel steel, stainless steel, aluminium, pulp, paper, semi-conductor, etc.
Other
Construction machinery, rail vehicle, factory, etc.
Means of Transport
Container, truck, air freight
Final Products
Main Cargo
Food, alcohol, clothing, newspaper, magazine, furniture,wax, paraffin, car, household appliance, etc.
Means of Transport
Container, truck, air freight, car carrier
      126
162.68 87 124 139.8
81
53.05
78.1
       Coal(million tons)
56.84
Metal Ore(million tons)
2011 2012
Crude Oil(million tons)
11.71
9.1
Grain(million tons) 2013 2014
  41.6
31
40
7.4
6.07
         China Shipping (Group) Company
▲ China Shipping’s freight volume of important materials (2011-2014)

  Organizational Structure
About China Shipping 11
      Party Committee
BOD
Supervisory Panel
BOD Office/General Office Operation Management Department Strategic Development Department
Finance Department
Safety Supervision Department
Human Resources Department Organization Department
Science & Technology & Information Department
Legal & Risk Management Department
Supervision & Audit Department /
Discipline Inspection Group Work Department/Party/Leadership Group Inspection Department
Party Laedership Group Work Department
Trade Union
  Special Committee
    Managers
      2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

      12
About China Shipping
  Management Team *
Xu Lirong Chairman of the Board and Party Secretary of China Shipping (Group) Company
Zhang Guofa Director, President and Party Committee Member of China Shipping (Group) Company
              Xu Wenrong
Vice President, Head of Discipline Inspection Panel and Party Committee Member of China Shipping (Group) Company
Su Min
CFO and Party Committee Member of China Shipping (Group) Company
Huang Xiaowen
Vice President and Party Committee Member of China Shipping (Group) Company
           Ding Nong
Vice President and Party Committee Member of China Shipping (Group) Company
* The management team is as of December 31, 2014.
Yu Zenggang
Vice President, Party Committee Member, BOD Secretary and Press Spokesman of China Shipping (Group) Company
         China Shipping (Group) Company

      Corporate Governance Our Philosophy
About China Shipping 13
  Build China Shipping into an Everlasting World-class Company
Create Values
for Customers
and Contribute to Social Harmony through Safe, Quality, Efficient and Green Services
   Keep Honest and Trustworthy, Strive for Excellence
Love My China Shipping, Take a Leading Position
Integrity and Compliance
Our Our
Vision
Mission
  Our Core Our
Value
Spirit
 China Shipping has upheld the business ethics of “honest operation and fair competition”, strictly observed laws and regulations, and adhered to integrity at work. In 2014, we deepened work style improvement by investigating into and punishing abuse of power for personal gain as well as violations of the “eight-point code” and the Party’s political discipline. We got to the bottom of irregularities committed at the height of crackdown, and circulated notices of criticism or gave warnings to the perpetrators. We organized inspection tours and promoted the development of integrity rules at tier-3 and tier-4 subsidiaries. We also conducted training to build employees’ awareness of compliance.
Risk Control
Abiding by the ideology of law-based corporate governance, China Shipping has enhanced internal control for effective, timely risk prevention and management. In 2014, we held a tight rein on the purse strings
and made rational plans for investment and financing to ensure safety and liquidity. We enhanced contract management, prevented credit risks and protected accounts receivable. We also intensified control over new business like trade finance, construction underwriting and logistics underwriting, and optimized the measures for prevention, control and elimination of risks in innovative modes.
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

  14
CSR Management
CSR Management
CSR management has always been an integral part of China Shipping’s operation. We have constantly enriched the connotation of our social responsibilities, integrated the ideology of sustainable development into daily operation, and strived for harmonious development of the Group, environment and society.
Route of Promoting CSR CSR Philosophy
An integrity central SOE
Create values through universal integrity
Sustainable development
     CSR Management Framework
  The Group CSR Committee
The Group CSR Working Group
Sub-companies
Responsible for social responsibility strategy formulation and planning approval
Develop the Group's social responsibility regulations; compile the Group's social responsibility development plans in three years and annual reports; develop the Group's annual work programs; guide and track the specialized company to carry out CSR, etc.
Develop strategic objectives and carry out the practice under the Group's sustainable development framework
    China Shipping (Group) Company
A safe central SOE
Striving for Safety- oriented Navigation
A citizen central SOE
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
A vibrant central SOE
A green central SOE

  CSR Planning and Objectives
Improving safety management, keeping ships and onshore/offshore entities under control
in terms of emergency and disasters, and ensuring operation during typhoon or other severe weather conditions
Safety
CSR Management 15
  Streamlining the customer service system, building the risk management awareness, and improving operation and risk prevention
Supporting vulnerable groups, engaging in disaster relief, and spurring the development of poverty-stricken areas
Enhancing safety management, optimizing fuel management, promoting environmental technology innovation, and implementing the green sailing policy
Laying stress on talent cultivation, and enhancing employee benefits and care
    ▲ China Shipping CSR Plan (2013-2015)
CSR Management at Branches/Subsidiaries
Following the guidelines of the Group, various branches/subsidiaries of China Shipping have proactively engaged in various CSR-related activities, striving to spread the CSR ideology to each employee and each position.
Adhering to operational excellence, conducting differentiated route operation, optimizing fleet structure, and developing new business modes
CSCL CSDTC
Sticking to operational excellence, enhancing internal reform, conducting differentiated route operation, optimizing fleet structure, and developing new business modes
CSBC CSPL
Strengthening the reform and innovation, promoting the transformation and development; adjusting and optimizing industrial structure layout; promoting the development of port industry internationalization; improving the management level and the talent team-building
CSPD
     Improving the safety management system to strengthen the core competence, developing new customer service modes, and optimizing cadre management rules and employee training system
Tapping into new markets, establishing new operating modes, enhancing
safety management, and promoting transformation and development
 ▲ CSR promotion at branches/subsidiaries of China Shipping
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Environment
Economy
Society
Employees

  16
CSR Management
Report Preparation and Identification of Material Issues
In order to know more about stakeholders’ expectations and requirements on China Shipping, we have, in the course of report preparation, conducted stakeholder interview and selected the report content according to the result. Besides, we have spared no effort to ensure the accuracy and compliance of the content.
   June-July 2015
Confirming the content of the report by various departments and subsidiaries
Reviewing the report by senior management
Drafting the final report
January-March 2015
Writing the outline of the report Drafting the report
Analyzing material issues
July-August 2015
Collecting stakeholders’ feedback
Planning for subsequent CSR-related tasks
April-May 2015
Determining the material issues Collecting and supplementing the data
December 2014
Setting up a work group
Collecting data
Benchmarking against industry peers
   ▲ Report preparation
Answering to the new requirements of GRI Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (G4), we have for the first time conducted analysis on material issues in the report, for the purpose of publishing information and providing reference for corporate sustainability management and practices.
Step One: Analyze sustainability background
   Economy
Drawn-out recession of shipping markets, decrease in demand and capacity surplus; successive issuing of favorable national policies-shipping enterprises have to pull themselves out of the straits.
Environment
The worsening global warming leads to an urgent need for energy conservation and emission reduction; “green sailing” has attracted wider attention.
Society
China Shipping is expected
to care more about employee development as well as sailors’ health and benefits, thus
better repaying society while making profits and showing responsibilities to shareholders.
   China Shipping (Group) Company

  Step Two: Identify relevant issues
CSR Management 17
  China Shipping’s CSR ideology, strategies and policies
Results of employee survey
Opinions from external stakeholders
Concerns of industry peers
Sustainable development guidelines, including G4 and CASS- CSR3.0
Compliance and integrity
Risk control
Crew safety Service quality
Employee development
Green office Employee care
Employee training Supplier management
Corporate governance and internal control
Environmental stewardship system
Promoting industrial development CO2 emissions
Waste management
Ballast water management
Supporting community development
Water use and management Protecting bio-diversity
and integrity
  Step Three: Determine priorities
References
Water usage and management
Supporting community development
Very high
Promoting industrial development
Employee care
Relevant Issues
Supplier management
Crew safety
Environmental stewardship system
Green office
Compliance
 Service quality
Corporate governance and internal control
 Risk control
Protecting bio-diversity Employee training
CO2 emissions Waste management
Employee development Ballast water management
    high
Extremely high
Significance to China Shipping
Step Four: Approve the content
    Internal audit
Evaluation by the management Evaluation by shareholders
Evaluation by subsidiaries and business units
External audit
Professional third-party evaluation
Benchmarking and survey on China Shipping’s engagement
▲ Identification of material issues by China Shipping
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Significance to stakeholders

   18
CSR Management
Stakeholder Identification and Engagement
 Customer satisfaction survey, customer communication convention, routine contacts and high- profile meetings
Enhancing service quality and customer satisfaction
Customers
General meeting of shareholders, public announcements, roadshows, promotions, shareholder engagement, and shareholders’ feedback
    Local volunteer activities
and media contacts
Volunteer activities, public welfare campaigns, donations and media coverage
Long-term, stable cooperation for win- win situation
Negotiations, regular visits, bidding session, and field surveys
Building corporate competence and maximizing shareholder value
Employee benefits, harmonious labor relations and career development
Employee congress, Trade Union, League Committee
  Stakeholder entities Topics of interest
▲ Stakeholder engagement mechanism of China Shipping
Means of communication
                   China Shipping (Group) Company
              Shareholders
Local community
Suppliers
Employees

  1 Achieving Excellence with Integrity
As the key to extensive movement of energy, resources, food and industrial commodities, shipping enterprises play a pivotal role in promoting sustainable development and global economic revival. Holding a leading position among them, China Shipping has always pursued the business philosophy of “attracting customers worldwide with honesty, building reputation through good-faith operation, and becoming a trustworthy, reliable and innovative
Achieving Excellence with Integrity 19
    global carrier”, supported the overall development of customers, regions and industrial chain, and facilitated commercial contacts between different countries and regions.
 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
 Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  20
FOCUS
Driving Regional Cooperation under the "One Belt and One Road" Initiative
In 2013, President Xi Jinping put forward the “One Belt and One Road” (Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road) initiative. The aim was to forge practical economic partnership between China and countries along the routes, so as to build a community of shared interests, destiny and responsibility that features mutual political
trust, economic integration and cultural inclusiveness. The construction of all relevant strategic pivots will bring in fresh opportunities for major international ports, terminals and logistics hubs in countries and regions along the course.
As the leader of the industry, China Shipping has responded actively to the initiative. In virtue of advantageous resources in shipping lines, logistics and ports at home and abroad, the Group has kept bringing forth new service models to meet diversified needs of countries and regions along the routes, deepened regional cooperation and offered an impetus to global economic growth.
   Silk Road Economic Belt
Extending to Asia-Pacific Economic Rim in the east and to European Economic Rim in the west, it is the “world’s longest economic corridor with the greatest development potential”.
Onshore
Developing new logistics service modes Promoting sea-rail transport
Jointly building the Asia-Pacific and Eurasian corridors
One Belt and One Road
China Shipping implements the “One Belt and One Road” initiative
21st Century Maritime Silk Road
At present, Southeast Asian nations are the main partners of China. In the future, China will extend its reach to the Indian Ocean, Middle East, Africa and the Mediterranean.
Offshore
Located in Istanbul, a key node on the Maritime Silk Road, China Shipping Turkey Agency offers container import/ export and inland transport services
Jointly building smooth, safe and efficient passageways
     ▲ Link between China Shipping and the “One Belt and One Road” initiative
◎ Innovating on Logistics Models to Spur Regional Development
The development of “Silk Road Economic Belt” is greatly underpinned by logistics. To be specific, the development of logistics will facilitate the movement of goods and services; such movement will bring about the growth of cities; and such growth will bolster up the economy. Relying on existing logistics companies along the Belt, China Shipping has placed vigorous efforts in developing stock yards, fleets and third-party logistics to greatly promote the trade and commercial contacts between China and the West as well as the common development of related countries along the route.
Connecting the land with the marine Silk Road, the rail-sea intermodal transportation has become an integral part of China Shipping’s development strategy. In the future, we will take full advantage of coastal ports, establish multiple inland dry ports, explore hinterland rail-container cargo sources and provide economical and convenient logistics service for domestic, export and import trade enterprises. For instance, CSCL will join hands with Shanghai Railway Bureau in establishing communication mechanisms, realizing information sharing and implementing major projects. This will enable CSCL to expand its reach to inland container transportation market and become, in real sense, a global comprehensive logistics provider covering marine shipping, rail transport, road transport and warehousing.
China Shipping (Group) Company

  ◎ Creating a New Pattern of Economic and Trade Cooperation, and Fostering a Community of Shared Responsibilities
China Shipping pays close attention to the development needs of all regions along the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road. To be specific, located in Istanbul - a key node on the Maritime Silk Road - China Shipping Turkey Agency relies on the advantageous shipping lines of CSCL, offering container import/export and inland transportation services in Mersin, Izmir, Bursa, Izmit and other major port cities of the country to boost local economic development.
To adapt to the modern shipping development trend, China Shipping has launched a shipping logistics and e-commerce platform named “e-shipping”. On September 16, 2014, the first shipments booked through “e-shipping” platform arrived at Kum port, Istanbul Turkey. China Shipping Turkey Agency (CSTA) organized a ceremony to which the Turkish consignee and CSTA employees were invited, and issued a commemorative medal to the consignee. CSTA also availed itself of
this opportunity to introduce “E-shipping” to local customers, especially small- and medium-sized importers, helping them develop a thorough knowledge about the efficiency, convenience and low cost of “e-shipping” and thus improve corporate management and work efficiency.
Since its founding, CSTA has been pursuing a policy that combines “going global” strategy with “localized development”. Except for GM and financial manager who are appointed by China Shipping, all employees come from local communities, which help boost local employment. Meanwhile, CSTA has promoted communications and cooperation by taking part in exhibitions, forums, product presentation fairs and all kinds of activities organized by local embassies and consulates, chambers of commerce and industrial associations.
◎ Realizing Win-win Development with Stakeholders
China Shipping has seized the opportunities presented by the “One Belt and One Road” initiative, striving to blaze new channels for logistics services and promote East-West cross-border trades through sea-rail intermodal transportation and innovative logistics service models. In addition to maintaining continuous and stable increases in principal business, we also endeavor to make due contributions to the sustainable development of countries along the routes.
Through sea-rail transport and business expansion of logistics enterprises, we have spurred the development of transport facilities of countries along the routes, effectively reduced transport costs, and facilitated business, capital and personnel exchange.
We have boosted economic and trade development of China and other countries along the routes, bringing Eurasian nations closer to one another and expanding the space of development.
We have inherited and upheld the spirit of friendly cooperation of the ancient Silk Road. China Shipping Turkey Agency is committed to deepening long-term strategic cooperation with relevant enterprises in Turkey, which has not only driven local employment and economy, but also promoted cultural exchange, mutual trust and understanding.
▲ China Shipping creates value for the Belt and the Road
FOCUS
21
   “CSTA is at the crossroad that connects Asia with Europe. Therefore, it shall endeavor to help the Group expand overseas market and, more importantly, play a vital role in the “One Belt and One Road” initiative. As Turkey is referred to as the ‘home of the brave’, we shall forge ahead with more courage in the future.”
——Wang Xiuping, CSTA General Manager
    2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 22
Achieving Excellence with Integrity
1.1 Creating Outstanding Value for Customers
Offering services that reach or even exceed customer expectations remains an exhaustible impetus for China Shipping to forge ahead. To that end, we have expanded our service network, worked out tailored schemes for customers, and constantly improved work efficiency and service quality to win customers’ confidence and trusts.
1.1.1 Contributing to the Globalization
China Shipping endeavors to build an integrated global market with all stakeholders, so as to remove barriers caused by distance, facilitate cross-border movement of bulk commodities through outstanding services, and stimulate global economy. In 2014, we accelerated our pace in expanding overseas network and saw vigorous efforts in developing diversified industries on overseas market.
Case Offering Quality, Tailored Services to Customers
As the largest retailer of consumer goods and tools in Canada, Canadian Tire runs approximately 1,700 stores and outlets with an annual sales volume of up to CAD 5 billion, and therefore sees a considerable and stable volume of shipments. In view of this, Canadian Tire has set up very strict criteria for shipping service providers in terms of credibility, shipping price, customer service, schedule reliability and guaranteed ship spaces, and selects providers by the way of bidding every year.
In 2014, to answer the customers’ requirements, we worked out four-week booking forecasts and sent updates to freight forwarding agencies at the ports of shipment, so as to facilitate advanced space booking. We informed customers in advance of any booking failures and explained reasons, so that they could think of alternative plans without wasting too much time. In addition, we extended our quality service from space booking and transport to pre-ordering supports, and received high recognitions from our customers. This is exactly why we won more bids for 2015 than our peers and recorded a 52% increase in annual minimum quantity commitment over the 2014 level.
    Promoting diversified development of overseas industries
Pressing ahead with the Yamal LNG project; expanding New Oriental’s ship leasing business and setting up four ship operators abroad; participating in Zeebrugge terminal project, Belgium and Asia Container Terminals project, Hong Kong.
Forming the pattern of seven holding companies overseas
China Shipping (South America) was opened in San Paolo, Brazil; the company established a customer service center in Atlanta.
Streamlining the route network around the world
China Shipping is establishing agencies in Mexico, Central Europe and Saudi Arabia as well as branches in Czech and Hungary; it has purchased equities of shipping agencies in Holland, Belgium, Singapore and Malaysia.
Optimizing the global marketing and service network of container business
New Oriental and CSBC optimized global layout by setting up offices in North America and Europe.
  China Shipping (Group) Company
▲ China Shipping contributes to the globalization drive

 1.1.2 Creating Amazing Journeys
With the development of the society and uplifts of living standard, people have higher expectations for the traveling services. China Shipping has, therefore, enhanced communication with travelers through visits, questionnaires and QQ group chats so as to better understand their needs and make timely adjustments by offering, for example, reasonably priced set courses, ticket booking/departure waiting/drop-off supports and other assuring, comfortable and touching services. In addition, we have set up the Wechat official account to publish timely updates of shipping schedules. In the future, we will establish an on-line marketing service platform and realize ticketing booking onWechatapps,inabidtooffermoreconveniencetoourcustomers.
Case Showing Loving Cares to Travelers
▲ CSPLWechatofficialaccount
Achieving Excellence with Integrity 23
     At 21:40, March 22, 2014, a traveler on CSPL “Pu Tuo Dao” suddenly felt intense abdominal pains. Knowing this, our crew initiated the contingency plan, sailed at full speed to buy time for medical treatment, and called a “120” ambulance to wait at the terminal. At the same time, we contacted
the hospital through satellite telephone for distant inquiry, took proper measures under the doctor’s instructions, and paid constant attention to the patient. Finally, the ship arrived at the port 40 minutes ahead of schedule for the patient to get timely treatment.
1.1.3 Expanding an Efficient Logistics Service Model
Based on the needs of our customers, we have strived to refine our customer service model. To be specific, we have prioritized the requirements of customers for logistics services and constantly optimized the original logistics models, so as to reduce the logistics costs and realize a win-win situation.
Case Cross-border Logistics Drive the Development of Cross-border E-commerce
In 2014, CSCL and China Shipping Network Technology Co., Ltd. jointly set up Shenzhen E-Shipping Gateway Co., Ltd. The aim was to integrate respective logistics resources and maximize the inflow of domestic and overseas customers and trades from Alibaba Group, thus establishing a brand-new public information platform for comprehensive logistics services.
With this platform, CSCL and Alibaba Group integrate respective resources and experience and carry out in- depth cooperation in cross-border logistics and e-business, so as to solve the logistics difficulties of going global for domestic e-commerce companies, provide “low-cost and high-standard” cross-border logistics services for SMEs, improve in an all-round manner the O2O logistics experiences of SMEs, and promote mutual support and development of cross-border e-business and traditional shipping logistics.
Case Innovating on Transport Service Models
From Ordos production base to Tianjin Port, Chery used to transport its auto parts all in containers and by road. After thorough investigations, China Shipping Logistics Co., Ltd. (CSL) discovered many problems with the original transportation model, such as heavy dependence on weather and road transport capacity and huge requirements for carriage free period by carrier owned CTNs. Considering the freezing and snowy winters in North China which may lead to icy roads and failure in guaranteeing the stability of transportation capacity, oil price and vehicle performance, CSL has put forth the option of rail-road intermodal transportation. To be specific, the cargoes will first be encased in rail containers at the production base and delivered to Baotou Railway Station by road. Then they will be sent to Tianjin Tanggu Station by train and re-encased in marine containers at Shengtie yard, Tianjin Port.
This novel model utilizes rail transportation (rail container) and re-encasement to ensure successful cargo delivery at lower costs for the customers and increase the profit potentials of CSL. The model has also received wide recognitions from Chery headquarters and on-site inspectors.
     2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 24
Achieving Excellence with Integrity
1.2 Supporting Regional Economic Development
In virtue of advantageous resources, China Shipping has enabled our customers to go global and, and at the same time, has actively been engaging in local communities to bolster up regional economy and competitiveness.
1.2.1 Assisting Customers in Exploring Overseas Market Based on ports and shipping lines across the world and professional quality services, China Shipping has
enabled our customers to sell products worldwide and engage in global competition.
Case Taking Customers to the World
Evergrande Spring, one of the customers of CSCL in domestic trades, had always found itself confused with the export procedures. Based on customer needs, CSCL appointed experts for training and guidance of the customer employees, assisted the customer in obtaining over ten import/ export certificates, and ensured the first batch of export products to be shipped on time to Europe within three weeks. Through this cooperation, CSCL took the customers to the world, expanded the business scale and improved the economic growth of the region.
Case Satisfying Customer Needs All in One Stop
The Thailand-made MG program marked the first step of SAIC Motor Corporation Limited (“SAIC Motor”) in implementing the “going global” strategy. Since the launch of the program, CSCL has
been the exclusive logistics supplier to offer integrated services. Being capable of responding to all problems and controlling all risks in one stop, CSCL has provided powerful logistics supports for SAIC Motor to go global.
Front-end services including space booking, customs declaration
& inspection, trailer’s port arrival, and space arrangement
     1
Information
services 2 3 including
cargo tracking,
schedule forecasting,
and arrival/departure announcement
Back-end
services including application
for detention & demurrage free period and services for shipping in Thailand
▲ CSCL integrated services
 China Shipping (Group) Company

 1.2.2 Pressing ahead with Construction and Development of Hainan
While constantly expanding the business scope, we have also taken a proactive part in the construction of the communities where we operate, so as to drive regional economic development. Since the establishment, China Shipping Haisheng Co., Ltd. has assumed the important mission of safeguarding the transportation
of goods and materials into and out of Hainan, and revved up municipal infrastructure development by supporting the construction of Hainan Special Economic Zone and International Tourism Island. In 2014, China Shipping Haisheng continued to safeguard the power supply of Hainan Island, and vigorously supported the output of minerals. It transported 1.3 million tons of power coals across Hainan; and 1.14 million tons of Hainan ores, representing a YoY increase of 17.5%.
Case Ensuring Efficient Power Supply
Huaneng Hainan Power Inc. is a major power supplier in Hainan. Affected by Typhoon Rammasun and Typhoon Kalmaegi in 2014, Macun Power Plant saw serious damages to the waterway facilities and found the power coals drying up, leading to short power supply. Knowing this, China Shipping Haisheng made power coal supply a top priority and rearranged shipping capacities based on the short notice of Huaneng Hainan Power about the coal import plan. China Shipping Haisheng also assisted Huaneng in organizing relevant entities to restore the waterway, worked with all other parties to ensure successful loading and unloading of cargoes, and deviled the power coals in time to solve the shortage of power materials and ensure power supply.
Case Sparing No Efforts in Satisfying Customer Needs
As an important kind of mineral resources of the province, Hainan ore has become one of the major bulk commodities output from Hainan. Through close ties with Hainan Mining, China Shipping Haisheng Co., Ltd. has understood the production and sales of Hainan ores, sparing no efforts in satisfying the shipping capacities required by a soaring volume of ore sales based on the company’s full shipping capacity, supports from other China Shipping subsidiaries and chartering services on the market. In Dec. 2014, Hainan Mining output 300,000 tons of Hainan ores, among which 140,000 tons were carried by China Shipping Haisheng Co., Ltd.
Achieving Excellence with Integrity 25
                                                                                          2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
      Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 26
Achieving Excellence with Integrity
1.3 Seeking Common Progresses with the Industrial Chain
China Shipping looks forward to progressing and developing together with industrial partners. It strives to optimize the industrial structure and drive the healthy development of upstream and downstream sectors while leading the industry in making progresses with innovative technology.
1.3.1 Contributing to Technical Innovations of the Industry
Relying on resource integration and collaboration, China Shipping has reinforced technical innovations in new vessel development, shipping safety, energy efficiency management and energy conservation; intensified the development and application of cloud computing, Internet of things, e-business platform and other frontier technology; and contributed wisdoms to the development of the industry.
Case Developing Intelligent Traffic System
Taking intelligent traffic surveillance and guidance system as a key focus, China Shipping Network Technology Co., Ltd. has engaged with security experts to set up the security program department, intensified R&D and market promotion of core technology of intelligent traffic products, and deepened the development of urban traffic and security businesses. In 2014, the company offered security services for CICA Shanghai Summit as well as the traffic guidance and automatic parking violation snap-shot programs in Fuzhou, Chengdu, Shanghai and other cities.
Including one MOT (Ministry of Transport) program,
one MOST (Ministry of Science and Technology)
“973” program and two MIIT (Ministry of Industry and Information Technology) “hi-tech ship research programs”
      Patents Papers
14 80 4
Research programs
  Including “ship energy-saving appendage technology”, “shipping safety technology” and “key technology for dynamic positioning system”
Including 11 published in Engineering Index and one awarded at an international conference
 ▲ Major achievements of SSSRI 1.3.2 Expanding industrial radiation
China Shipping has injected vigorous efforts in optimizing industrial structure, striving to develop a mindset based on the whole industrial chain instead of only vessels. Over and above the shipping business, we also highlight services in cooperation with upstream and downstream enterprises in the supply chain, in an effort to remove the bottlenecks along the chain, further expand and innovate on sea-rail transport, trailers, customs declaration and warehousing business, and finally build up an environment where the Group and stakeholders can co-exist, interact, progress benignly and back up each other.
Case Unleashing Advantages for Industry-Finance Integration
On November 10, 2014, the opening ceremony of China Shipping (Group) Leasing Co., Ltd. (CSL) and the signing ceremony of its first financial leasing project was held in China. As a pilot domestic financial leasing company approved by the Ministry of Commerce and the State Administration of Taxation, CSL will fully unleash the advantages of China Shipping in shipping, ports and logistics, and keep forging ahead to explore the potentials of downstream and upstream customers, so as to promote industry- finance integration as well as healthy and steady industrial development through premium services.
  China Shipping (Group) Company

 2Striving for Safety- oriented Navigation
Safety is one of the top priorities of China Shipping in fulfilling CSR. The importance of work safety is like the numeral “1”, which is followed by a sequence of “0’s” represented by the stable development of the company, well-being of employees and families, and rights and interests of customers. All stakeholders can enjoy their benefits only if work safety is guaranteed. In 2014, China Shipping set up the work safety supervision system, in an effort to foster a permanent safety mechanism over navigation, production and daily work.
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation 27
      2014 Corporate Social2R0e1s4p年on社si会bil责ity任R报ep告ort
  Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  28
FOCUS
Setting Up the Work Safety Monitoring System to Ensure Long-term Safety
The importance of work safety in ensuring steady corporate operation is beyond the shadow of a doubt. For a good many reasons, however, the safety administration system often fails to be implemented in concrete works. Although China Shipping has shown a satisfying trend in work safety and made considerable improvements every year, the damages and loses to employees and properties still exist due to safety accidents and have posed a potential threat to long-term safety.
Based on the requirements of “strengthening consciousness of dangers to promote safe development”, China Shipping has maximized the role of “people” in intensifying the responsibility system and carrying out concrete measures for work safety, so as to reduce the occurrences and damages of safety accidents.
◎ Setting up the Work Safety Monitoring System
In 2014, in accordance with the Interim Measures for Supervising and Administrating the Safe Production of Central Enterprises issued by the State-owned Assets Supervision and Administration Commission of the State Council (SASAC) and the requirement that “all central enterprises shall implement in an all-round way the safety director system, setting
up independent safety directors and independent safety monitoring departments”, China Shipping appointed safety directors and safety monitoring departments for seven ship operators and eight onshore/offshore companies. A relatively independent and efficient work safety monitoring system with clarified rights and responsibilities has gradually taken shape, in a bid to rev up the implementation of the responsibility system at all levels.
◎ Implementing the Responsibility System for Work Safety
The responsibility system for work safety identifies responsibilities for each specific post and individual employee to intensify the consciousness of responsibilities among relevant staff, and results in a shift of mindset from “I am required to be safe” to “I want to be safe”. In early 2014, China Shipping ensured conclusion of Work Safety Responsibility Agreement and Commitment Letters at various levels -the headquarters, direct subsidiaries and subordinate units - so as to pass the pressure and identify safety responsibilities, goals and tasks for leaders and employees at each level to ensure 100% employee engagement.
Managing Director First person
responsible for safety
Safety
responsibility Employees
 China Shipping (Group) Company
Managers implementation Concluding
Being responsible for work safety within their authorities
the Work Safety Responsibility
Agreement and Commitment Letters
▲ China Shipping implements work safety responsibilities at all levels

  ◎ Learning the New Work Safety Law
Since October 31, 2014, China Shipping has explained key points and standard terms of the new Work Safety Lawon three straight issues of Hai Yun Bao (a shipping magazine), and compiled major revisions into tutorials. Since the official implementation of the new law on December 1, 2014, the headquarters and subsidiaries have organized 1,277 training sessions, so as to uplift the legal consciousness of employees at all levels and urge them to abide by the law in everyday work.
◎ Living up to the Great Trusts
In 2014, the effects of the safety supervision system began to sink in. Along the constant improvements in safety performance have come steady uplifts in customer satisfaction and economic benefits, and effective control over personal injuries and equipment damages due to safety accidents. China Shipping has fully lived up to the great trusts of customers, employees and society.
Five cases of line-of-duty injuries less than those in 2013
Outstanding safety performance recorded by holding companies
All ship operators approved or certified as first-grade standardized enterprises
Improving safety management
Cutting losses of safety accidents
Paring down equipment repair costs
FOCUS
29
     ▲ Lifted safety management competence leads to transformation of socioeconomic value
 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Integrity
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
Economic performance
Social value

 30
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
2.1 Nipping Risks in the Bud
The recent years have witnessed a gradual uptrend in China Shipping’s safety performance and a downtrend in personal injuries and property losses due to safety accidents. But as great stress should be put on the prevention of accidents and a good job should lie in the littleness, we have never relaxed vigilance but strived to nip hidden dangers in the bud and minimize any possible losses.
Guided by the principle of “laying stress on the prevention of accidents”, we have seen further uplifted skills and operational competence among our employees, improved work environment for vessels and operation sites, and enhanced resistance against risks for subordinate companies, ports and vessels during the process of hidden danger detection and elimination.
In 2014, we detected and eliminated 16,760 general hidden dangers, of which 16,489 (98.38%)
were rectified. Unlike previous danger screenings, the Group selected captains and chief engineers familiar with all our vessels as inspectors, not only to find defects, but also to explain reasons and urge rectifications, all at the same time. This helped improve the rectification rate and enabled employees to obtain danger detection and elimination skills.
      Detected and eliminated
16,760
general hidden dangers
2014
16,489
general hidden dangers were rectified.
98.38
general hidden dangers were rectified.
1
%
  Year
2013
China Shipping (Group) Company
Vessels under PSC
504
447
▲ China Shipping’s safety performance
Zero defect vessels
362
333
Detention
3

 2.2 Building Safety-oriented teams
People are always the lynchpin of a company’s management competence. Highly responsible employees never cross the safety boundaries and are willing to check and prevent any hidden dangers. In addition, proficient in safety skills, employees can cope calmly with dangers and minimize any possible damages or losses. China Shipping has embedded a highly-developed sense of responsibility into the minds of all employees, and intensified safety training to build safety-oriented teams in an all- round manner.
2.2.1 Taking Safety Principles by Heart
The lack of experience of new hires has rammed home the need for China Shipping to carry out safety education. By embedding a safety-oriented mindset into training, we enable new employees to develop a clear understanding about the importance of safety as they first step on their career ladder.
In view of the special nature of work in the shipping sector, China Shipping has established a scientific and standard procedure for crew qualification tests and orientations, and invited experts with rich practical experience and solid professional skills to analyze safety accidents and taught staff lessons with typical cases.
Case Busy Training for New Sailors on “Peace”
As new members on the ship of Peace were unfamiliar with various equipment and not competent enough for ship operations, the captain intensified training and preview among the crew in compliance with the Australian PSC Updates issued by CSBC and CCS Australia, going through each item of the check list and rectifying upon discovery of any defects, so as to acquaint the new sailors with the work environment and arm them with professional skills.
▲ “Peace” lifeboat detaching drill ▲ “Peace” fire drill
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation 31
          2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 32
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
China Shipping has put vigorous efforts in fostering a safety culture, so as to enable all employees to get into a strong habit of safe operation and pass that habit to everyone around them.
  Case Creating a Safety Atmosphere
In December 2014, CIC Boluomiao Shipyard sent staff representatives to the production front-line, carrying out one-month safety compliance checks with emphases placed on on-site safety management, approval of operations with naked fire, work safety protection, safety measures implementation and environmental protection during ship repairing by internal teams or contractors. The representatives also exchanged minds with the workers over innovative safety management, so as to get extensive opinions and suggestions. Through constant launch of such activities, CIC Boluomiao Shipyard has fostered a safety- oriented culture where all employees take part in safety improvement to guard against risks anytime anywhere.
▲ Staff representatives are talking with constructors about operations with naked fire
  2.2.2 Embedding Safety Skills in Deeds
To improve the pertinence and fidelity of safety training, we have based our programs on real stories and sent experts to guide employees in case analysis and judgment, so as to warn each and every one
of the bitter lessons of blood and arm them with professional knowledge. In addition, the Group has intensified impromptu drills to enhance the employees’ emergency coping ability and make sure no one will relax vigilance.
Immediately after the Korean Ferry Sewol disaster, CSPL held a special meeting to analyze the reasons and identify faults in ship operation and emergency response, so as to improve the awareness of safe navigation among all employees.
China Shipping Tanker Co., Ltd. (CSDTC) has set
up a work safety board for investigation, analysis, evaluation and treatment of any accidents caused by its fleets, and used real accidents for case compilation and staff training, so as to enhance the emergency coping ability of relevant staff.
Director of Department of Dangerous Cargo Control and Pollution Prevention of Shanghai Maritime Safety Administration One
    Senior chief engineers Three
Senior captains
Two
Work safety board
Technology
Manager of Lloyd’s Register One
Senior ship surveyor from CCS One
    China Shipping (Group) Company
▲ CSDTC work safety board

 2.3 Safeguarding Smooth Navigation at Sea
Once collision, stranding and hijacking happened during navigation, the crew could rely only on themselves to handle the emergencies. Therefore, China Shipping not only provides ships with the best safety performance, but also brings in the most advanced installations and top-notch skills to improve navigation safety, and works out contingency plans against any possible seasonal and accidental disasters.
2.3.1 Building Safer Fleets
Seizing the strategic opportunity of “building China into a maritime power” and “constructing the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road”, China Shipping has revved up the structural optimization and lifted safety performance of ships under the guiding policy of “dismantling old ships and building new ships”.
Introducing 38 new ships weighing 3.641 million dwt in total
Reducing the average ship age from 8.73 to 7.68 years old
▲ China Shipping’s fleet replacement in 2014
Superannuating 49 ships weighing 1.434 million dwt in total
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation 33
    While accelerating the development of novel safety technology, China Shipping has also tapped
the full potentials of existing technology. In 2014, we combined closed-circuit television (CCTV) and vessel traffic services (VTS) with the responsibility system for work safety and the standardization of production, so as to safeguard the implementation of various regulations and institutions.
Since April 2008, China Shipping has been monitoring the traffic management system of the group's ships in and out of the Yangtze river estuary at Wusong, Shanghai. In 2014, altogether 5,474 ship- times were monitored. Throughout the year, there were four incidences of breaches of the ship’s routing system in Shanghai section of the Yangtze River, a considerable reduction from the 2008 level of 140 ship-times per year; and 32 incidences of breaches of the Group’s regulations, lower than the 2008 level of 165 ship-times. China Shipping registered a significantly lower rate of accidents in Shanghai section of the Yangtze River.
2.3.2 Avoiding Major Marine Accidents
To help marine navigators develop an accurate understanding about the Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea (COLREGS), improve the effectiveness and pertinence
of anti-collision training and lift the navigators’ anti-collision awareness and emergency coping skills, China Shipping has sent out anti-collision questionnaires and received answers from 1,039 navigators on 295 ships. Based on the analysis of the answers, the Group has made corresponding changes to the anti-collision training and orientation programs.
The constant improvements in the safety management system, the strict implementation of safety measures and the arduous efforts of all employees have translated into a low incidence rate of ship accidents for three consecutive years. But as there is no finish line for safety work, the Group aimed for greater safety performance in navigation in 2014.
▲ China Shipping’s ship accidents for recent three years
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
   Year 2014 2013 2012
 Total ship accidents (times) 22 19 21
 Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 34
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
 Case Implementing Strict Disciplines at the Bridge to Avoid Collision
CSBC has implemented strict disciplines for sailors on duty at the bridge, so as to avoid any man-caused collisions. In 2014, CSBC inspected the observation of such disciplines through random checks and port inspection. Throughout the year, the Group conducted spot checks over the CCTV of 136 ship-times, and the ship administration departments and offices conducted self- checks over the CCTV of 328 ship-times, fining out 51 ship-times with breaches and bad habits. All personnel who violated the provisions were given sanctions by way of educational criticism, bonus reduction and notice circulation, etc., in accordance with the seriousness of the cases. The disciplines were better observed after a very short period of time.
In 2014, all shipping operators and ships of China Shipping implemented strict anti-piracy measures and intensified anti-piracy drills. In 2014, 586 ships of the Group passed the Gulf of Aden and the Indian Ocean. Altogether 6 vessels took part in the navy's escort, 2 took part in joint convoy's escort, and 92 were equipped with armed security personnel. In 2014, China Shipping saw no incidence of ship hijacks.
Case Jing Yu Zuo Coped Properly with Suspected Pirate Attack
In the afternoon of April 25, 2014, as Jing Yu Zuo was entering the Red Sea via the Bab el Mandeb Strait, the sailors on duty noticed two fast-sailing yachts about five or six nautical miles ahead and then over 30 yachts approaching them from many different directions. The captain made a quick decision and sounded the warning sirens. All sailors run to their positions and were ready to fight against the pirates. Realizing there was not even the slightest of chances, the suspected pirates went away after about 40 minutes. This incident tested the emergency response of the crew and boosted their confidence in fighting against pirates.
2.3.3 Preventing Seasonal Safety Risks
Hazardous weather is the archenemy of shipping safety and may lead to enormous detriments even in these days of stronger anti-disaster abilities and advanced technology on ships. Typhoon and other extremely disastrous weathers, in particular, may inflict severe damages on ships, ports and equipment within a short period of time. In view of this, China Shipping steps up cooperation with the meteorological department, informing vessels of weather information in advance for them to make timely route adjustment or take precautionary measures. The year 2014 recorded nine incidences of typhoon in China, where Typhoon Rammasun made landfall on Hainan and became the strongest storm to hit South China since 1973. In virtue of adequate preparation and meticulous monitoring, China Shipping finally won the victory over Rammasun.
Case Establishing Annual Meeting System to Brace against Typhoons
Through July 12 to 22, 2014, altogether eight vessels registered under CSBC were affected by Typhoons Rammasun and Matmo. After the generation of typhoons, the company established the annual meeting system, so as to closely chart typhoon movements, offer timely navigation and anchorage information, monitor the position of anchored vessels, and design reasonable navigation routes. All affected vessels were fully prepared to brace against typhoons in accordance with the combating rules. The operators on duty also maintained contacts with the ships to gain an immediate knowledge about their progresses and work out corresponding countermeasures.
      China Shipping (Group) Company

 2.4 A Trustworthy Carrier of Special Goods and Materials
Under the successful strategy of diversified development, China Shipping has made port operation and industrial production its new growth engines beyond the principal shipping business. Work safety at ports and factories has also become our keen focus. Also, we have worked out standard assurance systems for cargoes with high risks or special safety requirements, to ensure all cargoes could arrive safe and sound at the port along with the vessels.
2.4.1 Building Safe Ports
Ports are where ships, goods, materials and people gather and are therefore the key to ensuring shipping safety. For the loading and unloading of freight containers with dangerous goods, China Shipping Ports Development Co., Ltd. has stipulated safety management rules, required subordinate joint ventures to follow strict reporting procedures for any port operations concerning dangerous cargoes, and worked out safety accident contingency plans and specific measures to ensure the safety of goods and storage yards.
For Nansha Stevedoring Co., Ltd. of Guangzhou Port, freight containers with dangerous goods, service machines, welding & cutting cylinders at the container repair plant, and diesel stations specifically used for port machineries are all major sources of risks and dangers. The company, therefore, has brought forth “measures on dangerous cargo management” and “regulations on safety management of cylinders in hot works”, and worked out contingency plans and on-site disposal schemes for any possible accidents.
Case Conducting Spot Checks and Implementing Strict Rectifications
In May 2014, the safety officers from China Shipping Ports Development traveled to Lianyungang for spot checks over New Oriental Internal Container Terminal. The officers identified the current problems of the terminal, including growing business volume, crowded yards, heavy traffic, cars competing for lanes and mixed pedestrian-vehicle flows, and put forth pertinent suggestions, such as setting pedestrian passageway, redrawing on-ground marks, placing warning signs, appointing safety inspectors, and installing speed bumps or traffic lights at intersections. They also urged the terminal to implement such improvement measures.
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation 35
                             2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
               Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 36
Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
2.4.2 Structuring a Strong Defensive Line for the Transportation of High-risk Items
China Shipping strictly observes pertinent requirements for the safety management of dangerous cargoes when transferring items covered by the International Maritime Solid Bulk Cargoes Code (IMSBC Code). For any items not included in IMSBC appendixes but involving a considerable risk during transportation, we have also worked out our own operating instructions with a reference to the prevailing measures in the industry.
Case Safeguarding the Transport of Nickel Ores
Though having not been included in IMSBC appendixes before Jan. 1, 2015, nickel ores do imply certain risks during loading and shipping. When containing a considerable amount of water, the ores will move like liquids with the movement of the ship and may flow in one direction as the ship leans to one side. It is therefore possible for the ship to get off balance and turn over.
In view of such risks, China Shipping Haisheng Co., Ltd. has evaluated and supervised the safety and fitness of all nickel-ore vessels, and required the carriers to take proper safety measures. In 2014, the company transported altogether 1.439 million tons of nickel-ores by 26 ships with great safety.
    Obtaining the cargo moisture content report before loading
Before the navigation
Refusing
the loading of cargo whose moisture content seems different to the report, and urging the consignor to dry such cargo
Closing the cabin the moment it rains to prevent water damage
During the navigation
Timely receivingy meteorological information to avoid bad weather
        ▲ Safety measures for nickel-ore transport
 China Shipping (Group) Company

 3 Aiming for Environment- Friendly Transport
China Shipping has always held a sense of respect and awe at the vast oceans and taken environmental protection as an unshakable duty. With
an aim of large-scale, modern and low-carbon operations, the Group has endeavored to present green products and services, so as to voice the good wishes of harmonious human-nature coexistence by the way of sailing.
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport 37
         2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  38
FOCUS
CSCL Globe's Maiden Voyage Ushered in a New Trend of Low-carbon Large Vessel
“Air pollutants and greenhouse gas emissions from the shipping sector have increased substantially in the last two decades, contributing to accelerated climate change and air pollution problems”, says a report from the European Environment Agency (EEA). Air pollutants emitted by shipping can affect the air quality in many areas, particularly around ports and busy shipping channels. As implied by Masamichi Marooka, Chairman of the International Chamber of Shipping, the imminent environmental regulations will place shipping enterprises under greater pressure and restraints in terms of environmental protection. In addition, the outbreak of the 2008 global financial crisis has also cast a gloom over the shipping sector. Faced with a constant downward trend in box rate, shipping enterprises are in urgent need for large-scale-development and low-fuel-consumption solutions. In line with this general trend of low-carbon economy, the ship industry is undergoing an upgrading from traditional techniques to energy-saving and environment-friendly technology.
◎ Phasing in the World’s Largest and Most Energy-efficient Container Ships
To adapt to the new trend of international liners under the “new normal” of global economy and shipping industry, China Shipping has strived to build an environment-friendly fleet with large, young and low-carbon vessels. This is also an important measure to implement the national strategy of “promoting the healthy development of the shipping industry”, optimize the fleet structure and uplift the international competitiveness.
In 2013, CSCL ordered five 19,100-TEU* container ships from South Korea’s Hyundai Heavy Industries. Measuring 400 meters in length and nearly 60 meters in width, each ship is 38 meters longer than the Royal Caribbean Cruises’ “Oasis of the Seas” and 67 meters longer than the “Nimitz” aircraft carrier of the US Navy, reaching a total size comparable to four football fields. With a designed draft of 14.5 meters at a service speed of 23 knots* , each vessel showcases the major state-of-the-art marine technology of the world , as it represents not only the largest, but also the most energy-efficient container vessel in the world.
* TEU= Twenty-feet Equivalent Unit
* The “knot” is a unit of speed equal to one nautical mile per hour.
On November 18, 2014, the first of the five 19,100-TEUvessels was delivered and named “CSCL Globe”. After its maiden voyage in China, CSCL Globe called at Singapore on December 19, taking off on a journey around the world.
▲ 19,100TEU CSCL Globe
 China Shipping (Group) Company

  ◎ Outstanding Environmental Performance
CSCL Globe has been assigned the Environmental Passport-Design (EP-D) class notation in compliance with all Marpol* regulations as well as other environment-related IMO* conventions, and has met all imminent environmental regulations. Compared with the current 14,100-TEU counterparts, CSCL Globe has seen unparalleled edges in environmental protection.
* International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships * International Maritime Organization
Shore power receiving system
Using shore power when berthing at terminals to reduce air pollution
77,200-BHP electronically-controlled main engine
Automatically controlling fuel consumption according to the ship’s speed and sea conditions
Ballast water treatment system
Avoiding damages to biodiversity caused by bringing ocean creatures to different waters
NK-NAPA energy-efficiency system
Optimizing the ship’s route and speed, and avoiding energy waste due to blind speeding-up
FOCUS
39
       ▲ Outstanding environmental performance of CSCL Globe
 ◎ CSCL Globe Travels to Create Values
In virtue of extraordinary environmental performance, the newly deployed CSCL Globe sees a considerable cut in energy consumption and fuel costs. Highly fuel efficient, CSCL Globe consumes 20% less fuel than CSCL’s 10,000-TEU ships. This added efficiency means that approximately 30,000 tons of carbon can be reduced annually, which is the equivalent of planting over 1.6 million trees every year. Meanwhile, the 19,000-TEU CSCL Globe is 20% larger in loading capacity than its 14,000-TEU counterparts, which helps boost operational efficiency, reduce transportation costs and improve profitability.
In the future, CSCL Globe will serve the Asia-Europe trade routes, so as to introduce Chinese commodities to other countries and facilitate the realization of the “One Belt and One Road” national strategy.
CSCL Globe carries everything from TV sets, auto parts, washing machines, furniture, clothes and computers to food and beverages, so as to facilitate the British and peoples along the course. It will herald an influx of Chinese goods into the UK even more quickly, and offer great opportunity for British exporters to access Chinese and Asian markets. CSCL Globe is like a window, through which you can see the delightful scenes of accelerated trades between China and the UK.
—— The Times
Like centuries ago, CSCL Globe takes Chinese products to the
rest of the world and brings their products back to China. It builds up a stable and strong platform for trade and communications, and offers a powerful transportation means for Chinese commodities to go global.
——Sun Feng, Captain of CSCL Globe
“CSCL Globe’s arrival at the Port of Felixstowe bears testimony to the flourishing economic and trade contacts between China and the UK, and will future expedite China’s shipping business and make greater contributions to the economic cooperation between both countries.”
—— Liu Xiaoming, Chinese Ambassador to the UK
     2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 40
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
3.1 Optimizing the Environmental Management System
In 2014, China Shipping made continuous improvements in environmental management system and convened the annual conference on energy conservation and emission reduction, so as to learn from historical data and identify limitations. In addition, we released the Interim Administrative Measures of China Shipping on Green Environment Award for Ships and identified “ships of the year” with leading performance in energy control during a single trip as the benchmark. We also introduced valuable experience and practices within the Group and kept improving our performance in energy conservation and consumption reduction. In addition, to regulate oil-containing wastewater treatment, we also worked out the Administrative Specifications of China Shipping on Oil-containing Wastewater Treatment which contains explicit provisions on the access, evaluation and withdrawal system of companies taking care of oil-containing wastewater, so as to clearly define duties and requirements and bring operational procedures up to standard. In 2014, China Shipping invested a total of RMB 59.56 million into the sphere of environmental protection.
CSCL
In lieu of the previous extensive practice of assigning fuel allowance to route administration departments, CSCL has initiated route-specific fuel allowance management and optimized the evaluation proposal for energy conservation and emission reduction.
 CSBC
CSBC has made detailed and explicit instructions on the organization and responsibilities of energy conservation
and emission reduction, the projects, contents and requirements of evaluation, and the incentive scheme.
CSCL Route-specific fuel allowance management
CSBC Interim Administrative Measures for Energy Conservation and Emission Reduction
CIC Rescinded, amended and newly formulated management document
CSDTC Comprehensive energy-saving mechanism
CSDTC
CSDTC has enhanced energy conservation from
the perspective of ship technology, established the appraisal, analysis and decision mechanism for
fuel cost control,
and strengthened guidance and monitoring of key links of ship operation.
   CIC
By streamlining its energy business, CIC Jiangsu Company rescinded or amended non-compliant or outdated management documents and formulated 47 new ones.
 ▲ Measures to optimize the environmental management system of China Shipping China Shipping (Group) Company

 3.2 Driving Green Production
Upholding the principle of green development, China Shipping has put vigorous efforts in promoting green production, revamped and phased out backward production capabilities, brought the environmental performance of products to a higher level, and uplifted the green competitiveness.
3.2.1 Upgrading Environmental Technology
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport 41
  China Shipping encourages all subsidiaries to adopt new technologies, new
products and new processes for energy conservation; revamp ships to conserve energy; popularize advanced energy-saving products and equipment; advocate the use of clean energy; and build a green fleet.
● In 2014, CSCL revamped the bulbous bow of three 5,600-TEU container vessels
in an effort to reduce fuel consumption at an “economical speed”, and registered a 5%+ fuel-saving performance. The company also took the lead in adopting the optimal trim technology, so as to avoid any difference between the draft at the bow and at the stern caused by the trim during sailing which will have a direct influence on sailing speed
and oil consumption. With optimal trim technology* , the company saved 23,188 tons of fuels. In addition, through technological transformation of electronic refueling machines and supercharger cutoff device, the company saved another 43,585 tons of fuels.
▲ CSCL revamped the bulbous bow of Xin Qin Huang Dao to conserve energy
   ● CIC Boluomiao Shipyard transformed the small mobilediesel compressor at Feilongshan floating dock into a large-scale 10KV electric compressor to improve energy utilization and reduce about 600 tons of CO2 emissions on an annual basis.
● China Overseas Property Management Co., Ltd. revamped the energy supply system and improved energy efficiency by 17.1%.
● CSBC finished transformation of cylinder lubricator on three VLCC ships. ● ......
* Optimal trim theory refers to the fact that under certain amount of load (with certain displacement volume), if the trimming (fore and aft draft) is changed, the shape of underwater part of the vessel will change, resulting in a change of wave-making resistance, friction resistance and viscous pressure resistance. Besides, due to the changes of motion attitude, different trimming (fore and aft draft) will cause changes in wake flow field, thus influencing the efficiency of propellers.
 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 42
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
 520
502
445
Total energy consumption (10,000 tons of standard coal)
352 343
293
Fuel (10,000 tons)
362 30,795 23,895
28,990
          83 124
OIL
Specific fuel consumption: 3.95kg/kt•n mile
    2012 2013 2014 ▲ China Shipping energy consumption
 Case First Restructured LNG Vessel Ushered in a New Era of Alternative Fuels As the cleanest mineral fuel, LNG enables a 20% reduction in CO2 emissions, 80%-90% reduction in nitrides
and almost 100% reduction in sulfides. It also features high heating value and extraordinary performance.
Upon thorough research and demonstration together with China MSA, Shanghai Maritime Safety Administration, CCS Shanghai Branch and Shanghai Ship and Shipping Research Institute, Puhai Shipping, a subsidiary of CSCL, has carried out LNG dual-fuel system restructuring for “Puhai 211”container vessel. It is the first restructured dual-fuel vessel in China that fully complies with CCS Rules for Natural Gas Fuelled Ships which took effect on September 1, 2013.
After a period of trial operation, the dual-fuel system on “Puhai 211” has seen constant uplifts in operational stability. The recent voyage from Shanghai to Wuhan registered a 58% comprehensive fuel replacement rate.
2012
Working on the project of LNG dual-fuel system restructuring for container vessels
December 2013
Piloting the system restructuring for “Puhai 211”container vessel
April 2014
Trial operation of Puhai 211
May 2014
Initial fueling
Natural Gas Power Consumption (10,000 nm3 ) (10,000kwh)
       The initial fueling of Puhai 211 was at Hai Gang Xing No.01, China’s first marine LNG fueling station. It marks the first fueling task of Hai Gang Xing No.01 for a State-owned large container ship since it went into operation, and a firm step forward towards the national development strategy of “low-carbon Yangtze River, clean Yangtze River and green shipping”.
▲ “Puhai 211”LNGdual-fuel system restructuring process
 China Shipping has pressed ahead with the implementation of research programs and solved difficult technology problems of environmental protection, energy conservation and emissions reduction. To be specific, the key national program “Research on Verification and Evaluation Technology of Ship Energy Efficiency Design Index (EEDI)” has been accomplished and passed the acceptance check; hi-tech ship research program “On-board Test of EEDI-based Evaluation and Sailing Speed Forecast Research” and “Development of Non-Stop River-Sea Energy-Saving and Environment-Friendly Container ship” of the Ministry of Industry and Information Technology have been approved. We have also obtained the patient for “ship energy-saving appendage technology”. In addition, “Research on Energy-saving Appendage and Key Technology” conducted by the Group won the third prize of the Science and Technology Award of Chinese Society of Naval Architects and Marine Engineers, and “Auxiliary Electric Heating Device
of Oil Supply Unit” of China Shipping Haisheng Co., Ltd. became one of the first exemplary green, low carbon and recyclable programs of the transportation industry.
China Shipping (Group) Company

 3.2.2 Presenting Green Products
China Shipping encourages all subsidiaries to bring forth innovative environment-friendly products and services and lift their environmental performance, so as to ensure green practices in development and achieve low-carbon goals through innovation.
China Shipping Industry (CIC) keeps expanding its product lines. Subsequent to the success of 110,000-ton Aframax tanker and 10,000-TEU container ship, CIC has built two 105,000 ocean-going bulk carriers for Fujian Shipping Company. The bulk carriers feature a shallow draft and consume 15% less energy than the current Panamax when sailing at the same speed.
China Shipping Logistics (CSL) promotes the uses of small-displacement, low-consumption and low- emission vessels as well as fuel additives, detergent additives, lubricant additives and other novel products for energy conservation, in an effort to reduce any environmental impact during transportation and offer customers green products and services.
CIC Boluomiao Shipyard has built the 100KW "Sharp Eagle" wave energy converter* for Guangzhou Institute of Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences (GIEC CAS). This novel floating wave energy converter consists of two power generating systems and one mooring system to change the wave energy into constant electricity.
* Wave energy converter operates to convert wave energy first into mechanical energy, and then into electricity. Wave energy is a kind of inexhaustible renewable source of energy.
China Shipping Environment Technology Co., Ltd. has developed the acoustic windows for Hangzhou Xiaoshan International Airport, and installed them in typical noise-affected areas of the airport. The monitoring data from Zhejiang Environmental Protection Scientific Research & Design Institute just approved the extraordinary performance of the windows in noise reduction.
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport 43
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

 44
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
3.3 Realizing Green Sailing
The modern shipping business is driven principally by petroleum and contributes 6%, 20% and 30%
of the world’s annual CO2, SOx and NOx emissions, respectively. In view of this, China Shipping has advocated green sailing on the principle of “less energy consumption, less emission and less pollution”, making reasonable arrangements on sailing courses and speeds, following standard procedures for exhaust treatment and reducing the environmental burdens during transportation.
3.3.1 Sailing at a Green Speed
Reduced main-engine load may result in less fuel consumption, but greater difficulties in ship management. Along the attempts to gradually reduce the main-engine load have come incredible challenges and difficulties. In 2014, China Shipping continued to promote the use of economical speed to more vessels for energy conservation and emission reduction. We carried out technical evaluation and necessary improvements of large container vessels for them to adapt to lower loads, and specified the speed indicators of “economical speed”, “extremely low speed” and “special economical speed” for vessels of different types, as well as specific operational procedures and requirements for maintenance and monitor on related facilities. In 2014, the economic speed saved 505,000 tons of fuels for the Group.
 2009
40%MCR
All self-operated large container vessels
of CSCL realized 40%MCR ultra-low- speed sailing
2012
30%MCR
All self-operated large container vessels
of CSCL realized 30%MCR ultra-low- speed sailing
2013
25%MCR
All self-operated large container vessels
of CSCL realized 25%MCR ultra-low- speed sailing
2014
15%MCR
Over 70% of the self- operated large container vessels of CSCL realized 15%MCR ultra- low-speed sailing
▲ CSCL promoted the use of economical speed
Case “More Ships and Lower Speed” Leads to New Chances of Fuel-saving
In addition to the economic speed, CSCL has also probed into other constructive strategies, with an aim to realize fuel-saving at lower speeds while guaranteeing satisfying service qualities. After taking markets, ports of call and other factors into consideration, CSCL has decided to choose the Far East-East America AAE1 line for exemplary transformation. CSCL used to run nine 4,250-TEU ships for AAE1, consuming 4,417 tons of fuels per ship per trip. After the transformation, ten ships are now deployed for this line to reduce the fuel consumption to 4,065 tons per ship per trip, saving 352 tons per trip and nearly 18,000 tons every year.
   China Shipping (Group) Company

 3.3.2 Practicing Green Operations
Both on-shore operations and on-sea crew activities produce an enormous amount of sewage, exhaust gas, solid wastes and noises which, if not placed under strict management, will lead to serious pollutions to the environment. In compliance with pertinent international and national regulations, China Shipping has formulated a series of rules to regulate the disposal of wastes during production and navigation. In 2014, CIC Boluomiao Shipyard won the title of “(Outstanding) Enterprise of Clean Production in Guangzhou”.
CSCL: Reducing waste water generation and enhancing discharge management CIC: Online monitoring of waste water treatment
CSPL: Ensuring compliance with the requirement of zero discharge of slop China Shipping Ports Development: Discharging after centralized processing
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport 45
      CSPL: Unified treatment after port arrival
China Shipping Haisheng: Strictly observing the latest international standards
CIC: Unified processing after classification
CSPL: Installing silencers at air-supply pipelines as well as at exhaust systems of main and auxiliary engines
CIC: Transforming the equipment and replacing buzzer sirens with flash alarms to reduce disturbance to neighboring residents
Solid waste
Waste water
Emission gas reduction
Noise Dust
CSPL: Using a sophisticated dynamic system to reduce NOx emissions, and maintaining equipment in best state to pare down smoke discharge
CIC: Enclosed dust absorption with dust-removing water curtain and sand-scouring shed, and replacing iron sand with bronze sand which costs more yet generates less dust
   Waste
     ▲ Specific measures to reduce emissions
  1,096.81 1,067.36
21.16
20.59
17.56
910.2
             CO2(10,000 tons) 2012
SO2(10,000 tons) Emission intensity
CO2 SO2
12.30 0.24
 2013 2014
▲ China Shipping waste gas emissions
(kg/kt • n mile)
The rapid development of shipping industry has increased the possibility of biological invasion at ports of different countries. To prevent the ballast from spreading unwanted aquatic organisms and pathogens, we have installed ballast water treatment plant for all newly built vessels since 2012, to effectively prevent the spreading of aquatic organisms in different waters and the disruption of ecological balance.
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 46
Aiming for Environment-Friendly Transport
3.4 Advocating Green Office
China Shipping strives to bring out the green spirits of its employees through campaigns, initiatives and activities, and encourages them to change unwanted behaviors. What is more, we place strict management over the use of water, power, paper and other resources to stop any wasting and build green offices.
    Total paper consumption in 2013
753,259
Total paper consumption in 2014
557,933
▲ China Shipping’s annual paper consumption
China Shipping encourages the employees to organize and participate in environmental campaigns and volunteer activities. In 2014, with the theme of “jointly creating a clean environment through energy- saving and low-carbon operations”, we organized activities during the National Energy Conservation Week and Low-carbon Day to introduce the concept of reasonable energy consumption, popularize pertinent policies and regulations on environmental protection as well as knowledge about energy conservation and emission reduction for the ship industry, and encourage all employees to support environmental protection by refining work procedures and every little things. We also took part in the “2014 energy conservation and emission reduction publicity campaign of the transport industry”.
 Outstanding program for low-carbon, green and recyclable development of the transport industry in China
Supercharger cutoff transformation for large container vessels
 Trim optimization for 9,600-& 14,100-TEU vessels
 New Century Container Terminal Electric RTG
 Continuous sanding line for container plate pretreatment
 Advanced enterprise for low-carbon, green and recyclable development of the transport industry in China
 CSCL
 Contributor to low-carbon, green and recyclable development of the transport industry in China
 Yingkou New Century Terminal invested by China Shipping Ports Development Co., Ltd.
 Advanced individuals for low-carbon, green and recyclable development of the transport industry in China
 CSDTC employees
 China Shipping (Group) Company
▲ Honors for low-carbon, green and recyclable development of the transport industry

 4 Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
The enterprise and its employees constitute a community of interest; employees’ development is complementary to the fulfillment of the enterprise’s strategic goals. China Shipping respects the efforts of all members, safeguards their basic rights and interests, supports their broad- based development, cares about their work and life, and is more than eager to continue our exciting voyage with them.
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents 47
      2014 Corporate Social2R0e1s4p年on社sib会ili责ty任Re报p告ort
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  48
FOCUS
Reform of Crew Management System, a New Chapter of Institutional Development
The crew takes up half of China Shipping’s total employees. Given the changes in shipping markets, the original crew management system is beset with overlapping responsibilities, low efficiency, stalled mobility and poor utilization of resources, weighing down the crew’s income for all the Group’s high input. In the time of drawn-out recession, how to better deploy the crew, respond to their concerns and safeguard their interests is one of the key issues facing employee management.
◎ Ideology
Laying stress on “resource integration, cost management, responsibility circumscription and smooth transition”, the reform of crew management system has targeted the existing problems, benchmarked against world-leading peers, eliminated resource mismatch, reduced unnecessary costs, strengthened crew management and built our market competitiveness.
Actively and steadily, ensure marine shipping safety and the stability of crew thought
Do not cut the disposable income of the crew
The ship operators cost decreased obviously
CSISC has cooperated with ship operators to constantly reduce crew costs and management expenses.
On the strength of management reform, CSISC has reduced redundant personnel and enhanced resource utilization and labor efficiency.
Through the integration of the Group’s resources, CSISC is now responsible to crew managers at main ship operators and for crew management.
CSISC has clearly defined the crew management responsibilities, concluded service contracts with all sailors, and laid down the standard lump-sum crew fees.
▲ Objectives and pathway of the reform of crew management system
◎ Major Breakthroughs
For the normalization of intensive, market-oriented, professional international crew management, the reform, which starts with the improvement of crew quality, crew cost and competitive salary, is bound to enhance resource integration and corporate competence, and comprehensively serve the long-term interests of the Group and our employees.
   4
3
2
1
   China Shipping (Group) Company
Goals

  Clearly defining and streamlining the responsibilities of CSISC and main ship operators for the purpose of scientific and standardized management; improving crew quality, unleashing the advantage of professional management, and enhancing the effectiveness of targeted training
FOCUS 49
  Strengthening implementation of our objectives, mission, management ideology and job duties, enhancing education on ideal and faith, and building the awareness of
“three services”; normalizing corporate culture development, and creating a harmonious, pragmatic and enterprising atmosphere by calling on employees to learn from role models
Benchmarking against outstanding international shipping and crew management enterprises
to offset our weaknesses and build world- class crew teams; establishing a normalized resource streamlining system, developing scientific resource guarantee models, and exploring the path of global crew deployment
Normalized work style improvement
Professional crew management
Reform
of crew management system
Intensive use of resources
Promoting rational crew mobility and resource utilization through unified management, resource sharing and peak shaving; including external sailors in service into our payroll, increasing crew turnover and reducing unnecessary labor costs
 Benchmarking against international peers
Market- oriented intra-Group transactions
Cutting lump-sum crew costs and enhancing competitiveness through market-oriented intra- Group transaction; driving management through market mechanism, building service and cost awareness, and caring more about the crew
 ▲ Major breakthroughs of China Shipping’s crew management system
◎ Benefits of resource integration
Thanks to the reform, China Shipping has enhanced the efficiency of crew management, better safeguarded crew’s
interests, and reaped higher profits with lower costs.
Changed the development concept: Through the reform, China Shipping changed the traditional concept of crew deployment, respected the market rule and adhered to the trading rules more, traded internally according to the crew labor market price and the agreement, defined the responsibilities of CSISC and ship operators, standardized the rights and obligations. Both sides did their bits and straightened out the division of labour, promoting the group's strategic business competitiveness.
Intergreated the crew resources: China Shipping focused on specialized and intensive management. The crew and the crew managers were dispatched on the same platform in CSISC and are centrally managed. Ship companies no longer allocated overlapedly so that the number of crew managers were reduced, the management cost was cut, the effective integration of crew resources was realized, the overlay cost was cut and the crew labor cost was effectively controlled. The crew labor cost of the group decreased by 308 million yuan in 2014 .
   Enhanced the sense of belonging of the crew: Under the reform, China Shipping further strengthened the crew's group consciousness and the sense of "China Shipping family", strived to guarantee the crew's welfare and care, provided broader career stage for the crew, provided a more thoughtful management services; increased and upgraded crew training, strengthened the dominant role and master function of the crew in the enterprise development, formed a harmonious atmosphere of respecting, understanding, caring and protecting the crew.
The reform of crew management system has boosted the crew’s income. Relevant training has improved the crew’s skills and quality. There is also a sharp increase in the crew’s enthusiasm and safety awareness. All of us have shared the reform dividend.
——You Xiaobo, a captain at CSISC
 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 50
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
4.1 Attracting Talents to the China Shipping Family
Diversified talents are the wellspring of our globalizing company. We are committed to building a diversified, inclusive and vigorous family, offering equal employment opportunities to people around the world, and pooling first-class innovative talents.
Whether in China or in other parts of the world, we have strictly followed the laws and regulations of the country/region where our operations are based, promoted the policy of equal employment, and brought people of different ages, genders and cultural backgrounds into our fold. We have rooted out discrimination based on education, gender or race, eliminated the use of child labor and forced labor, and left no stone unturned to safeguard the legitimate rights and interests of employees.
    Domestic employees:
18,157
Trade Union density:
100%
Crew:
19,673
    Social insurance premium collection:
100%
Abroad cadres:
165
Minority ethnic employees:
626
Return to work and retention rates after parental leave:
92.86%
     Foreign employees:
2,071
Contract- based employees:
100%
   Percentage of female managers:
28.33%
Employee turnover:
4.15%
Disabled employees:
278
▲ Employee composition of China Shipping 8% 7%
39%
26-35 years old 46-55 years old
31%
2% 41% 26%
  23%
25 years old or below 36-45 years old
56 years old or above
23%
 ▲ Age structure of China Shipping’s employees
Vocational high school graduates or others
Bachelor’s degree holders Associate degree holders Holders of Master’s degree or higher
▲ Educational level of China Shipping’s employees
China Shipping (Group) Company

 4.2 Facilitating Talent Development
Adhering to the ideology of growing with employees, China Shipping has, in the course of “going global”, taken pains with creating an employee development platform so as to build younger, professional, and international talent teams.
4.2.1 Optimizing Talent Planning
We have constantly improved our mechanism and plans for talent development, striving to bring into shape well-structured, high-quality teams, stay ahead in terms of shipping resources, and set the stage for “going global”. In 2014, we formulated and published the Outlines of China Shipping’s Plans for Cadre and Talent Development (2014-2015), and set up a leading group and a work group for projects concerned, thus systematically promoting the cultivation of high-caliber professionals.
Promoting the development of
leading talents in various sectors
Strengthening ideological and theoretical education
Main tasks
Intensifying the practical training of cadres
Enhancing the promotion, cultivation and management of talents
Optimizing the cadre management supervision mechanism
Deepening the reform of cadre appointment and promotion system
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents 51
     ▲ China Shipping’s main tasks in cadre and talent development
Improving the mechanism of cultivation,
appointment and promotion
for future talents
 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 52
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
4.2.2 Spurring Shared Growth
Having included employees’ personal pursuits into corporate development strategies, China Shipping is committed to offering plenty of educational resources, conducting targeted training and expanding career paths, thus providing a staunch support for employee growth.
● Plenty of Educational Resources
Setting much store by the training facilities, in 2014, we passed the expert panel assessment on Shanghai’s first high-skilled talent cultivation bases, led the preparation for the examination and acceptance of Shanghai Maritime Academy as the said base under Shanghai Municipal Human Resources and Social Security Bureau, and facilitated the application of the Academy for the sailor and maritime engineer evaluation and accreditation station, thus cementing the infrastructures for employee training.
● Full-fledged Training System
China Shipping has connected our staff to managerial and technical training. In 2014, we invested RMB 67.94 million in 3,677,616 hours of training for 268,552 person-times. Individualized sessions were offered to systematically improve employees’ professional skills.
In order to constantly improve the post adaptability of employees, CSISC’s training centers has successively organized systematic training for the “three commanders”, systematic training for pilots on the Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea, systematic training for cadre sailors on “five preventions” (with prevention of collision as the mainstay), systematic training for sailors and maritime engineers on safety, systematic training for cooks on culinary skills, training on new technology and types of ships, and training for newly-promoted cadre sailors. In 2014, the training centers in Shanghai, Guangzhou and Dalian offered various types of training to 40,586 person-times. Stats show that over 90% of the recipients are “very satisfied” or “satisfied” with the contents, lecturers and arrangements, and more than 96% with the lecturers in particular.
In 2014, China Shipping party school/management cadre institute adhered to the general requirements of "serving the strategic development needs, serving the competitive ability of professional companies, serving the quality and ability of party members and cadres", focused key aspects, arranged identity, independent, accredited training modes, carried out targeted, distinctive training projects by different level and stages. Yearly,the group has organized 61 independent classes and offered training to 2,620 person-times, completed 104.8% of the annual plan. Auxiliary group functional departments and affiliated institutions organized 35 classed and offered training to 2,872 person-timea. There were 96 classes and 5,492 person-times altogether and the training satisfaction rate was 99.07%.
Case “70s & 80s Generation” Cadre Program in 2014
Eyeing the strategic goal of “promoting corporate reform, innovation, transformation and upgrading”, China Shipping has launched at the Party School a six-day training program for “70s & 80s Generation” outstanding cadres, which program, consisting of three modules (Party spirit, reform & development, and leadership), aims to help the cadres further consolidate theoretical knowledge, develop strategic thinking, enhance Party spirit, ideological standards, political awareness & work skills, and adapt to the Group’s need for scientific development. A total of 42 hand-picked cadres were involved in the off-the-job program.
   China Shipping (Group) Company

 ● Diversified Cultivation Mechanism
Considering the huge differences between the work arrangements of onshore and offshore employees, China Shipping has customized full-fledged career paths for each type of employees, providing institutional guarantee for vertical and horizontal mobility.
Case Dual Career Paths
In 2014, CSCL teamed up with CIIC HR Management Consulting Co., Ltd. to design the dual
career paths. The “management path”, which runs at two layers (departmental and divisional management), applies to administrative staff and embodies relevant contents and requirements of cadre management, while the “business path”, which is divided into five tiers (authority, expert, pivot, backbone and support) and 11 sub-tiers, targets specialized talents engaged in specific tasks and features scientific design of performance evaluation, salary adjustment and promotion.
The dual paths built on the administrative career route have helped youth employees give scope to their talents and find ways to distinction, guided them in aligning their vocational interests with the Group’s needs, offered them a broader playing field and excited their career aspirations.
Energetic, flexible, open-minded and quick-witted, youth employees represent our hope and our future. We have adopted multiple approaches to facilitate the growth of youth employees, ensuring the rational development of talent teams with scientific age structures.
Holding seminars to encourage engagement in business transformation and learning on the job
Educating youth employees in patriotism and corporate tradition Promoting deeds of youth employees to create an enterprising and vigorous atmosphere
Taking into account the results of written test, interview and satisfaction survey for the masses
Giving scope to employees’ talent and offering a level playing field for promotion
Creating a favorable environment for the growth of youth employees
Enhancing on-the-job training and guidance
Identifying premium training resources and courses and encouraging constant learning
Looking for talents through internal publications and group activities
Working on the mentoring mechanism based on bi-directional selection Jointly making cultivation plans to align the development goals of youth employees and the Group
Training youth employees through major projects
▲ China Shipping’s major approaches to the growth of youth employees
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents 53
        Learning environment
 Fair promotion
 Practical training
 Mentoring
      2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen
Youth employee cultivation

 54
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
4.2.3 Respecting Personal Value
China Shipping recognizes employees’ contributions to corporate development. We have set up
a dynamic incentive mechanism based on their capacity and contributions; besides, we have held colorful labor contests to reward those with outstanding performance and work skills, and to ignite their enthusiasm and vitality.
Cherishing the efforts of every employee, we have constantly improved our merit pay system and boosted team dynamics. By amending the 2014 Yearly Salary Plan for Heads of Affiliated Enterprises in China and the Business Performance Evaluation Proposal for Affiliated Enterprises in China, we have better matched pay with performance and personal value.
In 2014, we continued to hold the Group-wide “China Shipping Cup” Labor Contest. CSBC, CSPL, China Shipping Haisheng, China Shipping & Sinopec Suppliers and other affiliated enterprises engaged in diversified activities based on their actual conditions. The past year bore witness to 551 labor contests of various types involving 55,278 person-times, and 242 technical competitions with a turnout of 5,497. Such activities have showcased the charm of employees and increased their sense of fulfillment.
▲ “China Shipping Cup” Labor Contest
      China Shipping (Group) Company

 4.3 Caring about Employees
“Loose and tight” is our motto for constantly maintaining the high morale of our teams. We advocate work-life balance, pay heed to employees’ health and enrich their leisure hours, striving to build a “happy China Shipping” and spread affection to every corner of the Group.
4.3.1 Enhancing Prevention of Occupational Diseases
Health is the premise of happy work. Guided by the ideology of “safe and harmonious development”, China Shipping attaches great importance to the prevention of occupational diseases. We have created comfy and safe workplaces, reasonably designed the processes and workload, conducted relevant training in a systematic manner, and engaged our staff in the National Knowledge Contest on the Prevention of Occupational Diseases during the “safety promotion month”, thus building the all-round capacity for morbidity control and keeping employees in their best form at work.
Case Health Examination for Employees Engaged in Special Tasks
Employees engaged in special tasks are susceptible to health risks. Adhering to the management concept of “putting people first”, on June 19-20, 2014, CIC Boluomiao Shipyard organized health examination for over 400 employees exposed to high temperature, dust, noise and toxic substances. The health examination helped them better understand their physical conditions, safeguarded their vital interests, prevented occupational hazards and conveyed solicitude to all.
4.3.2 Maintaining Crew’s Health
The crew spends most of the time in offshore operations, and a bout of illness or injury may pose a serious threat to life. Keeping crew’s health in mind, China Shipping has taken care of every detail of offshore operations, striving to reduce the impact of emergencies and guaranteeing crew’s life and health.
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents 55
         Specifying the process of crew health examination and immunity management, and preventing sick or non-immune sailors from getting on board
Arranging health examination at professional agencies to ensure crew’s health
Adding personal insurance for the crew when buying hull insurance to ensure timely support for the sick and the injured
Strengthening health examination for crew
Covering crew with medical insurance
Equipping ships with necessary personnel and apparatuses
Establishing the emergency dispatch system
Equipping each ship with
a captain, a first mate and sailors with Onboard Medicare Training Certificate and relevant experience
Equipping ships with necessary drugs, apparatuses and regular medical supplies
Replacing in one day any sick or injured sailor who needs treatment off-board
Sending the sick or the injured to the hospital and attending to them by personnel from specific departments
       ▲ China Shipping’s scheme to protect crew’s life and health
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 56
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
Permanent offshore operations will exercise a great influence on mental health. We have hired consultants to customize a suite of de-stressing and adjustment methods for employees of different ages, offer psychological guidance and help them maintain a good state of mind in work and life.
  Regularly offering psychological advice
Inviting psychological consultants to provide regular guidance for newly recruited college graduates majoring in offshore operations Training crew managers and ship leaders so they can offer daily psychological advice to sailors
Enriching cultural life onboard
Setting up the library, video room and recreation room onboard
Regularly supplying ships with newspaper, magazines, books, DVDs, table tennis bats and pokers
Organizing mental health examination
Integrating mental tests and guidance into the post-job health examination, and preventing from sailors with mental health problems getting on board
Conducting psychological training
Conducting a series of professional psychological training for crew in addition to orientations for new hires, business sessions for ship leaders, and management seminars for cadre sailors
  ▲ China Shipping’s scheme to protect crew’s mental health
4.3.3 Improving the Quality of Life
In 2014, China Shipping organized an exciting series of sports and cultural activities, providing a broad
platform for employees to express themselves, explore their interests and enjoy their leisure hours.
▲ “China Shipping Cup” 2014 Yangzhou Jianzhen International Half Marathon & National Half Marathon Championship
▲ Shanghai Shipping (Group) Company held a Mid-Autumn ▲ Contest of China Shipping’s Festival party for youth employees from other cities offshore crew
    China Shipping (Group) Company

 4.3.4 Caring about Special Groups
Regarding employees as family members, we have, through a variety of activities, provided humanistic care especially in summer, winter and holidays, and support their children’s studies so that all employees can work and live happily.
● Front-line employees
We always adhere to the principle of “visiting on-site”, which is a tradition for the management getting to know the needs of grassroots employees and crew members at factories or terminals. In 2014,
the management visited 50,927 person-times in total, offering RMB 8.463 million consolation money, RMB 5.9116 million high temperature consolation money and RMB 19.6197 million high temperature allowance.
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents 57
       ▲ Visiting front-line employees during hot spells
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 58
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
● Female employees
Female employees constitute an indispensable part of our company and have a vital bearing on corporate development. In 2014, we organized a series of activities to celebrate the 104th anniversary of International Women’s Day, and assisted five entities in setting up Love Mummy Huts, in an effort to provide constant care for female employees.
Case Caring about Nursing Moms
CSCL Headquarters have reserved in its new office building a “hut” for nursing moms. Aside from the fridge, air conditioner, baby bottle sterilizer and other necessities, the hut is decorated with plants and wall-newspaper. Since it came into use in September 2014, many young mothers have expressed their gratitude for the opportunity to spend some quality time there.
▲ Four Love Mummy Huts set up by CSCL
       China Shipping (Group) Company

 ● Family members
Permanent offshore operations keep the crew away from families. Therefore, we have paid particular attention to sailors’ wives and kept them in touch with one another, with sailors and with the Group via the dedicated liaison stations, thus promoting their understanding and support and freeing the crew from family disharmony.
▲ Sailors’ wives are sending New Year greetings ▲ New Year’s greeting park visits for China Shipping’s employees and families in
Guangzhou
▲ Activities for sailors’ wives
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents 59
        2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 60
Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
● Retired employees
Retired employees dedicated their youth and hard work to China Shipping. The group sent warm greetings and care and helped with their afterlife, caring for the retirees wholeheartedly.
Case CSISC Sent Tailor-made Ship Models to Retired Sailors
   ▲ CSISC sent tailor-made ship models to retired sailors
On December 5, 2014, CSISC
held a video conference attended
by retired onshore and offshore employees from Shanghai, Guangzhou and Dalian. We reported the progress of “ten deeds” for crew care, showcased the initial achievements of the reform of crew management system, and sent to each participant a ship model which was tailor-made based on the ship where the specific sailor had worked, The work information of the sailor was recorded on the nameplate. The elaborate gift has indeed embodied our affection and care.
 ● Needy employees
Each employee is a valuable asset of our company. Therefore, the staff support system was
set up for prompt assistance
in times of need. We have engaged our staff in the “one day donation” activity, established and streamlined the needy employee profiles, and standardized the processes and rules in respect
of counterpart aid. In 2014, we provided support for 10,099 person-times, granted RMB 10.108 million to poverty-stricken members, and offered RMB 707,500 to 690 needy employees and migrant workers to help their children study.
▲ Children of needy employees at China Shipping’s showroom
 China Shipping (Group) Company

 Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen 61
5 Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
China Shipping has integrated stable business development with social harmony, adhered to the mission of “contributing to social harmony”, and implemented the CSR ideology of “serving our country and society”. We have safeguarded public interests, promoted community prosperity, supported social welfare and behaved as a responsible global citizen.
         2014 Corporate Social2R0e1s4p年on社sib会ili责ty任Re报p告ort
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  62
FOCUS
MH370 Salvage
Malaysia Airlines flight MH370 missing on March 8, 2014 with 154 Chinese passengers weighs heavily on our hearts. Salvage teams from all countries successively rush to the suspected crash areas. As a responsible corporate citizen, China Shipping, like all Chinese people, is deeply concerned over the incident.
◎ Establishing the Search Command Center
Through establishment of the Search Command Center, we are able to stay in touch with China Maritime Search and
Rescue Center around the clock and give unequivocal orders to all merchant fleets in our fold.
◎ Joining the Salvage Team without a Moment’s Delay
On March 21, upon receipt of a salvage briefing from China Maritime Search and Rescue Center, we confirmed that CSB Brilliant, CSBC’s 300,000-ton bulk carrier which was then engaged in ore transport between China and Brazil, was closest to the suspected crash area in South Indian Ocean. Although the new destination was 1,350 nautical miles away and off the normal route, CSB Brilliant immediately adjusted its sails to the mission and made a salvage plan.
      Salvage arrangements
Identifying salvage risks and making contingency plans
Making salvage arrangements concerning safety watch on deck, overlook, equipment use, and self-production of salvage tools for the sake of efficient search and timely actions
Reporting ship location, speed and estimated time of arrival to China Maritime Search and Rescue Center and the Group at 0:00, 6:00, 12:00 and 18:00 (local time) every day
Ensuring the onboard machinery and emergency equipment is ready for use, and conducting rescue training to prepare the crew for all situations
Making all-round preparations including logistics, first-aid, board & lodging
     ◎ Rising to the Challenges
▲ Salvage arrangements for CSB Brilliant
As a make-shift search vessel, CSB Brilliant was not well placed for the mission. Our sailors, however, with their professionalism and seamanship, braved the treacherous elements of the suspected crash area, overcame the physical and mental stress of looking for a needle in a haystack, and completed their tasks with flying colors.
China Shipping (Group) Company

 FOCUS 63 Scrutinizing and debugging facilities and
replacing those at fault so as to ensure normal operations under severe sea conditions
March 23
Conducting rescuing training and emergency drill
7:00, March 28
Wrapping up the salvage upon order of China Maritime Search and Rescue Center due to changes in suspected crash areas
▲ CSB Brilliant captain Liu Zubin is
calculating the route with the second mate suspected crash area SW of Perth, Australia
◎ Completing the Salvage with Flying Colors
 08:40, March 21
Rerouting the ship to a suspected crash area 3,200 km SW of Perth
10:15, March 24
Discovering a floating object which turns out to be an animal carcass after being retrieved from the water
14:00, March 26
Arriving at the target waters, adjusting ship speed to 10 knots, and conducting the salvage as planned
11:30, March 21
Making the optimal navigation proposal and contingency plans
14:00, March 23
Heading for the waters 2,000 km west of Perth with four search plans
5:50, March 27
Arriving at the target area designated by the Australian Rescue Coordination Center under inclement weather conditions
CSB Brilliant in MH370 salvage
March 22
      ▲
   During the salvage which lasted for 166 hours from 9 a.m., March 21 to 7 a.m., March 28, CSB Brilliant sailed 1,997.1 nautical miles and searched an area of 3,003 square nautical miles, registering zero safety or pollution accident and zero casualty.
As of March 24, CSCL and China Shipping Development Co., Ltd. had engaged 24 vessels (including Xin Nan Sha, Xin Ning Yang and Bai Lu Zuo) in salvage missions in Gulf of Thailand, Strait of Malacca and Bay of Bengal. China Shipping & Sinopec Suppliers spared no effort to supply fuel to the vessels.
As China’s first merchant ship engaged in the salvage in waters west of Australia, CSB Brilliant filled the world in with exact first-hand data, and excluded a suspected crash area in South Indian Ocean in the shortest time possible. Through participation in international rescue, China Shipping has performed the responsibilities of a large State- owned enterprise and built the image of a global corporate citizen.
▲ CCTV’s report and appraisal on China Shipping’s salvage mission
▲ CSB Brilliant sailors are overlooking the
   2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

  64
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
5.1 Shouldering Responsibilities in Times of Disaster
We have proved ourselves an active participant in disaster relief, aware that timely assistance is the best solace, economically and psychologically, for the flummoxed victims.
At 16:30, August 3, 2014, a 6.5-magnitude earthquake struck Ludian County, Zhaotong City, Yunnan Province, causing heavy casualties and economic losses. China Shipping made a quick response by donating RMB 3 million to the disaster area.
On April 11, 2014, tap water in Lanzhou was found to contain excessive levels of benzene. That night, Evergrande Group donated 12 million bottles of mineral water from warehouses in different regions.
As an important logistics service provider of Evergrande, CSCL kicked off a contingency plan upon request for transport coordination at midnight. Our staff at Yingkou, Wuhan, Chongqing, Nanjing and other outlets worked away on the weekend night to facilitate delivery at ports and terminals and urgently dispatch trailers, hoping to freight the water to Lanzhou as fast as they could. By 4 p.m., April 12, all
the 12 million bottles (490 TEUs) had been en route, some of which were delivered into the hands of Lanzhou residents on the same day.
We are greatly touched by the dedication of CSCL’s staff who worked double tides on weekend to ensure the efficiency and order of our water donation.
——Xu Chunlin, Director of Logistics Department of Evergrande Spring
  China Shipping (Group) Company

 5.2 Contributing to Regional Development
We are keen on sharing our achievements with social stakeholders, and committed to repaying society by helping the needy. For years, we have offered partner assistance to many poverty-stricken areas, injected large quantities of resources to shore up local socioeconomic growth, and built with love a cozy and harmonious ecosystem.
Our partner assistance to Yongde County* , Yunnan has lasted for nine years. With emphases placed on student support, rural medical care and cadre training, we have constantly increased investment- totaling over RMB 23 million in education, infrastructures and industrial development, helping the county to alleviate poverty through development, and greatly enhancing the level of production and standard of living in the mountainous areas.
* Located in the west of Lincang City in southwestern Yunnan, Yongde is a typical mountainous agricultural county and a national poverty alleviation target with one-third of its population below the poverty line due to the lack of access, limited arable land, weak industrial foundation, and backward economy and education.
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen 65
    In 2014, China Shipping made donations of RMB 4.35 million, including RMB 3.3 million from the headquarters, RMB 666,000 (in
cash and in kind) from customers and subsidiaries, and RMB 390,000 from employees
  One of our subsidiaries donated 55 computers and over 4,500 books to Yongde No.1 Senior High School
The Group subsidized 100 needy students from Yongde; our employees supported 137 students. We also raised RMB 100,000 from external stakeholders for 30 students.
  In August 2014, the seventh student support team headed for Yongde. Over the past nine years, we successively assigned 18 cadres and seven volunteer teachers to the county.
 ▲ China Shipping’s student support in Yongde
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 66
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
Yongde has nearly 160 primary and secondary schools, yet each school has only an average of
ten teachers. Given the lack of qualified faculty, China Shipping has set up at Yongde No.1 Senior High School a “China Shipping class” for seniors who stand a chance of being recruited as crew members on a regular basis. We have assigned outstanding volunteers to take charge of the class and subsidized a total of 35 local teachers.
In order to further establish the long- term mechanism for student support, encourage mass participation and systematically track the growth of subsidized students, in 2013, China Shipping Youth Volunteers’ Association made common cause with Yunnan Yongde Project Hope Office to replace non-targeted, phased grants with
 a so-called “Wave • Wish” partner assistance campaign, a ribbon linking the company/employees with needy students. So far, 61 students have found their “sugar daddies”.
▲ China Shipping’s employees are playing with students from Yongde From southwestern hinterland to coastal areas are we leaving our philanthropic footprints:
  CSCL has launched the “China Shipping” scholarship for students and graduates who are excellent in character and all-round knowledge from Ningbo Hongda Lining Hope Primary School, Taijiang County, Guizhou Province.
  2
3 Jinhui Town, Fengxian District, Shanghai.
Dalian Shipping (Group) Company donated RMB 20,000 and materials worth RMB 5,000 to its partner-Wafangdian City, Dalian.
  SSSRI donated RMB 30,000 help-the-poor fund from Party members to its partner - Baiqu Village,
  2
133 - Longtian Village, Shangping Town, Longchuan County, Heyuan City, Guangdong Province - for
CSDTC donated RMB 20,000 (RMB 6,000 subsidy, RMB 5,000 student grant, and consolation articles worth RMB 9,000) to its partner-Yuyao Village, Nanhui District, Shanghai.
  In 2014, Guangzhou Maritime Transport (Group) Co., Ltd. donated RMB 1.33 million to its partner poverty alleviation and construction of service facilities.
  In 2014, SSSRI CSNT Trade Union organized the 3rd and 4th “Sending Love to Tibet”* campaigns during the Children’s Day and before winter, donating children clothes, toys, coats and winter quilts.
* The “Sending Love to Tibet” campaign owes its existence to an initiative of a cadre sent to support Tibet. The first batch of coats were donated to Lhatse County in the winter of 2012, and distributed to residents of two villages in Chau Township in March 2013. During the second campaign in June 2013, with the theme of the Children’s Day, CSNT Trade Union doled out 18 packages of clothes, books, stationery and toys to Shigatse Center for Child Welfare.
China Shipping (Group) Company

 5.3 Engaging in Public Welfare
Charity & volunteering suggest persistent devotion. In China Shipping’s charity relay, all employees are the torch bearers who pass the flame of hope and passion through their work and life, and in so doing they motivate themselves.
5.3.1 Building the Volunteer Culture
Founded in 2005, China Shipping Youth Volunteers’ Association is an entity member of Central Enterprises Youth Volunteers’ Association and Shanghai Youth Volunteers’ Association. So far, it has registered over 2,500 volunteers and 75 service teams at various levels. Each year in March, or the “volunteer service month”, the teams will throw themselves into environmental protection, poverty alleviation, guided tours, eldercare, and support for large events. By means of WeChat public account, they have staged the “My Help, My Pleasure” China Shipping Micro-forum, a platform for volunteers to share their experience and feelings and grow up together.
In 2014, China Shipping’s volunteers engaged in the “Wave • Wish” campaign in Yongde; the “lighthouse initiative”, “port initiative” ,“new journey initiative”, and other voluntary services during the “volunteer service month”; the Port Beneficent Foundation charity bazaar, “Happy Volunteer Services • Green China Shipping” tree planting activity, and “Learning from Lei Feng” Volunteer Service Day activity.
For our services at the Conference on Interaction and Confidence-Building Measures in Asia, Xu Min from Puhai Shipping was honored by Shanghai Municipal Committee of the Communist Youth League of China as an “outstanding volunteer”, and China Shipping Youth Volunteers’ Association as an “outstanding volunteer team”.
▲ China Shipping’s volunteers
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen 67
            2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 68
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
5.3.2 Spreading Love to Society
Over the past years, China Shipping’s employees have offered constant support to empty nesters,
poverty-stricken children and other vulnerable groups, spreading love and warmth to society.
China Shipping
By setting up the China Shipping Scholarship for Offshore Operations in 2007, we encourage students to work hard and devote themselves to the maritime industry. Over the past seven years, we have awarded scholarships of over RMB 2 million for 1,000-odd students, more than 98% of whom become our crew members after graduation.
     CSPL
CSPL teamed up with Dalian Traffic Radio and Tianjin Traffic Radio in a public welfare campaign, escorting students from Dalian to their campuses in Tianjin.
COHL Investment Developing Holdings Limited
Employees of COHL Investment donated books, food, toys and other consolation articles to Jinzhou Center for Child Welfare.
CSCL
CSCL spent a day with children from Qizhi Children’s Nursing Home at Tianjin Binhai New Area, and brought them books, clothes and articles of daily use. It also launched a clothing donation drive to spread affection and warmth to children from poverty-stricken areas.
Guangzhou Xinhai Hospital
Xinhai Hospital sent New Year greetings
to the retirees living alone, conducted health examination for them and introduced healthcare knowledge.
            China Shipping (Group) Company
▲ China Shipping’s social care activities

 5.4 Performing CSR as a Global Citizen
We implement the development strategy of “going global” by tapping into overseas industries and establishing ourselves as a globalized enterprise. The seven holding companies in North America, Europe, Hong Kong, Southeast Asia, West Asia, Africa and South America have engaged in community development, promoted local employment and disseminated Chinese culture, thus performing CSR
as a global citizen and creating a more favorable policy and cultural environment for shipping industry development and transnational operation.
China Shipping South America Holding
Paying taxes of USD 454,338 and offering 21 jobs to locals over the past year
Organizing employees to donate CLP 1.1 million to victims of the Great Fire of Valparaíso, Chile in April
Participating in the annual marathon race in the Port of Santos
Participating in MOVIMAT, a logistics fair in South America, to promote China Shipping Organizing regular football games with partners during leisure hours
China Shipping Europe Holding
Offering 635 jobs
Subsidizing the 13th Chinese Bridge - Chinese Proficiency Competition for Foreign College Students to promote China Shipping
China Shipping (Romania) contributed to the 2nd Chinese Dream Enterprise Scholarships China Shipping (UK) launched the “office open day” to engage the local
China Shipping Africa Holding
Paying taxes of USD 889,098 and offering jobs to 80 locals
Offering Chinese classes by professional teachers to local employees, giving the students a better sense of Chinese culture
Participating in a series of activities, especially the celebrations of the Year of China in
South Africa, organized by Chinese Embassy and Consulates in South Africa, the Economic and Commercial Counsellor’s Office, and the Sino-South African Economy and Trade Association to promote bilateral relationship and introduce Chinese culture, history and latest developments
▲ Localization efforts of China Shipping’s holding companies overseas
Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen 69
           2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Achieving Excellence with Striving for Safety-oriented Aiming for Environment-Friendly Thriving Enterprises by Contributing to Harmony as a Integrity Navigation Transport Developing Talents Responsible Citizen

 70
Outlook 2015
Outlook 2015
   Orientation
Achieving excellence through universal integrity
Striving for safety-oriented navigation
Aiming for environment- friendly maritime transport
Thriving enterprises by developing talents
Spreading harmony through the construction of corporate citizenship
Working Plan
Building risk management awareness, and improving operation and risk prevention Enhancing operation and management, promoting industrial development overseas, and serving the “One Belt and One Road” initiative
Promoting our main business (shipping) as well as strategic emerging undertakings (terminals and ports)
Streamlining the customer service system and process
Optimizing the workplace safety monitoring mechanism, and strengthening its implementation at various levels
Continuing to ameliorate the responsibility system for workplace safety, furthering the standardization of production, and guiding branches and subsidiaries in passing the first- grade standardized enterprise examination
Maintaining workplace safety, and reducing ship accidents and line-of-duty injuries
Constantly promoting the development of larger-sized, low-carbon young fleets
Offering guidance and encouraging enterprises totap into the potential of equipment and technology by starting with technical development and management innovation, and promoting the application of new materials, processes, products and techniques in favor of energy conservation and emission reduction
Capitalizing on the implementation of the Administrative Measures for Green Ship Award by conducting energy consumption data analysis and benchmarking and comprehensively enhancing statistical and analytical skills
Streamlining relevant rules and gradually bringing into shape an energy management system running the gamut of procurement, management, utilization and waste treatment
Adhering to equal employment, calling for candid and open communication, and consistently building diversified teams
Implementing the Outlines of China Shipping’s Plans for Cadre and Talent Development (2014-2015), optimizing the employee promotion scheme, strengthening youth employee training, streamlining the cadre supervision system, and bringing up a contingent of high- quality talents
Furthering the reform of crew management system, unleashing the advantages of abundant resources, bettering safeguarding crew’s rights and interests, and building overall corporate competence
Constantly offering support to employees, paying heed to their health, enriching their leisure hours, caring about their families, and striving for a happy China Shipping
Consistently adhering to the mission of “contributing to social harmony”, and proactively engaging in various types of maritime rescue
Integrating and redeploying resources in support of socioeconomic development of less developed areas
Ramping up support for vulnerable groups, offering assistance to more persons, families and groups in need, and helping them improve their living skills
Organizing and participating in public welfare, espousing the growth of employee volunteer teams, and providing volunteer services to meet diversified needs of society
                             China Shipping (Group) Company

 2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report
Outlook 2015 71

 72
Expert Comment
Expert Comment
Comment on China Shipping 2014 CSR Report
First, I would like to congratulate China Shipping on the fourth straight year of publishing the CSR report. The 2014 CSR Report offers me a clear view on the Group’s efforts to implement and spread the ideology of Global Compact. On a personal note, this report, as compared with previous ones, shows the following characteristics:
Brand-new structure: At the top of each chapter is a section focused on the China Shipping’s CSR priorities and hot-bottom issues in 2014, which section, made up of back stories, solutions and value, has responded to stakeholder concerns in an all-round manner and elaborated on the Group’s systematic approach to integrating CSR into daily operation and performing CSR. Taking economic responsibilities for example, echoing the “One Belt and One Road” strategy, the Group has channeled its savvy into new logistics service modes, smooth sea-rail transport and overseas terminals, showcasing its value in spurring the implementation of the strategy and the sustainable development of regional economy.
Transparency and materiality: With reference to the latest requirements of G4 and CASS-CSR 3.0, China Shipping has introduced the section of “Report Preparation and Identification of Material Issues” to standardize and expound the processes and methods of topic selection and finalize the material issues through stakeholder communication, thus indicating the extent to which the Group pays heed to stakeholder concerns, enhancing the transparency of this report and proving the materiality of CSR performance.
Compliance with Global Compact’s labor and environmental protection standards: In
a bid to address environmental challenges and implement the “big ship, low carbon” strategy,
China Shipping has imported the world’s largest and most energy-efficient container liner, CSCL Globe. The Group strives for green products and services, constantly improves its environmental management system, and retrofits its ships to minimize environmental impact. It has stepped up
the reform of crew management system, benchmarked against world-class peers, strengthened crew management, enhanced the quality of sailors, safeguarded their basic rights and interests, implemented new initiatives for crew care, strictly followed the ten principles of Global Compact, and realized responsible globalization.
In short, the rich content, striking characteristics, and compliance with the latest CSR reporting requirements have ensured the quality of this report. It is our hope that China Shipping will continue to unleash its resource and managerial advantages, fulfill its multi-faceted responsibilities, and contribute to industrial and socioeconomic development.
——Han Bin, Executive Secretary General of UN Global Compact Network China
 China Shipping (Group) Company

 Expert Comment 73
 Comment on China Shipping 2014 CSR Report
It is a great honor to share with you again on China Shipping CSR Report. What impresses me most about the 2014 CSR Report is that there are so many breakthroughs - in corporate management, in CSR performance as well as in the structure of this report.
In 2014, China’s socioeconomic development entered into a “new normal” typified by the deepening of economic reform and the acceleration of industrial transformation and upgrading. Keeping abreast of the times, China Shipping has promoted the integration of internal and external resources in an orderly manner. It has successfully reconciled diversified development with the building of core competence, balancing various undertakings while maintaining the steady pace of its main business - shipping. As a result, a number of new growth engines have taken shape, coupled with a sharp increase in overall profitability. It has established new business modes and extensively reached out to partners with the aim of jointly building sustainable industrial chains and providing customers and society with high value-added services. It has firmly seized the opportunities brought by the New Silk Road Economic Belt and the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road, contributing to the bigger picture of inter-regional connectivity.
With the ever-increasing managerial expertise comes a constantly improved CSR management scheme. The establishment of workplace safety monitoring mechanism in the best interest of ships, crew and customers has a vital bearing on the implementation of the responsibility system for workplace safety and the standardization of production. The reform of crew management system is a key step of China Shipping to safeguarding employees’ rights and interests and strengthening talent development. The debut of CSCL Globe indicates the success of “big ship, low carbon” strategy, and consolidates the Group’s industry-leading position in terms of environmental protection. The noble effort in MH370 salvage is just another example of CSR commitment. All of these have padded the CSR section of China Shipping’s resume.
Equally amazing is, among others, the content and structure of this report. For the first time has
it conducted materiality analysis on China Shipping’s CSR management as per G4 standards, elaborating on the priorities and orientation of CSR performance through the lens of internal
and external stakeholders. For the first time has it exhaustively described, in specific sections, China Shipping’s major CSR practices in various areas, and visualized the Group’s endeavor and accomplishment. I have every reason to believe that the original content and structure will be the “new normal” of China Shipping CSR Report.
In short, China Shipping has made great breakthroughs in CSR performance as well as the report. It is my sincere hope that the Group will go further towards sustainable development and repay our expectations with even better performance.
——Yin Gefei, Vice President of China WTO Tribune and Director of International Research Center for Social Responsibility, Sustainable Development of Peking University
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

 74 Benchmark
Benchmark
   Contents
GRI G3.1 indicators
CASS-CSR3.0 indicators
Front cover
 About This Report
Overview
P1.1
Compilation Principles
P1.1
Reporting Period
3.1
P1.1
Release RFrequency
3.3
P1.1
Reporting Scope
3.6/3.7
P1.2
Data Source
P1.1
References
P1.1
Access to this Report
3.4
P1.3/P1.4
Messages from Senior Managers
1.1/1.2
P3.1/P3.2/A1
About China Shipping
Company Profile
2.1-2.7
P4.1-4.4
Organizational Structure
4.1
P4.1-4.4
Management Team
P4.1-4.4
Corporate Governance
4.8
G2.5/M1.1/M1.3/S1.1-1.4
 CSR Management
Ideology of Promoting CSR
G1.1
Report Preparation and Identification of Material Issues
3.5
P1.1/P2.1-2.3/G1.3/G5.2
Stakeholder Identification and Engagement
4.15/4.17
G2.2/G5.1/G5.3/G5.5
 Achieving Excellence through Universal Integrity
Focus No.1
S1.6-1.7/M2.7/M3.5/S4.5
Creating Outstanding Value for Customers
PR5
M3.1-3.3/M3.6/M2.7/M2.13/M2.14
Supporting Regional Economic Development
M3.5/S1.6
Seeking Common Progresses with the Industrial Chain
M3.1/M3.5/M3.6/M3.7
 Striving for Safety-oriented Navigation
Focus No.2
S3.1-3.5
Nipping Risks in the Bud
S3.1-3.3
                          China Shipping (Group) Company

 Benchmark 75
  Contents
GRI G3.1 indicators
CASS-CSR3.0 indicators
Building Safety-oriented Teams
S3.4-3.7
Safeguarding Smooth Navigation at Sea
S3.4-3.7
A Trustworthy Carrier of Special Goods and Materials
S3.2-3.3
 Aiming for Environment-friendly Maritime Transport
Focus No.3
E1.1/E2.7-2.12/E3.4
Optimizing the Environmental Management System
EN26
E1.1-1.2
Driving Green Production
EN6/EN7/EN30
E2.1-2.3
Realizing Green Sailing
EN3/EN4/EN5/EN26
E2.7-2.12/E3.4
Advocating Green Office
EN12/EN14/EN16/EN18/EN20
E1.10-1.11
 Thriving Enterprises by Developing Talents
2.10/EN29
Focus No.4
G2.24-2.30
Attracting Talents to the China Shipping Family
S2.1-2.2/S2.4/S2.9/S2.11/ S2.14-2. 15/S2.31
Facilitating Talent Development
LA1/LA2/LA13
G2.24-2.26
Caring about Employees
LA11
S2.17-2.21/S2.27-2.29
 Contributing to Harmony as a Responsible Citizen
Focus No.5
S4.13
Shouldering Responsibilities in Times of Disaster
S4.9/S4.13
Contributing to Regional Development
S06/EC1
S1.6/S4.13-4.14
Engaging in Public Welfare
EC8
S1.6/S4.13
Performing CSR as a Global Citizen
S4.11/S4.13
 Outlook 2015
A1
Expert Comment
A2
Benchmark
A3
 Appendix
3.12
Memberships with Major Social Organizations
P4.6
Honors
4.13
P5.3
Feedback Form
A4
Back Cover
                          2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

 76 Appendix
Appendix
Memberships with Major Social Organizations
 Organization
 Position
China Shipowners’ Association
China Communications and Transportation Association
China International Freight Forwarders Association
China Institute of Navigation (CIN)
CIN Committee for Shipping Pollution Prevention
CIN Committee for Dangerous Goods Transportation
Chinese Society of Naval Architecture and Marine Engineering
China Association of the National Shipbuilding Industry China Association of Work Safety
Shanghai International Shipping Center Development & Promotion Organization
Shanghai International Shipping Institute
Shanghai Shipping Exchange
Shanghai Association of Work Safety
Sino-Foreign Energy Cooperation Think-tank
Cross-Strait Sea Transport Exchange Association
ASF Safe Navigation & Environment Committee
Baltic and International Maritime Council (BIMCO)
International Association of Dry Cargo Shipowners (INTERCARGO)
International Association of Independent Tanker Owners (ITOPF)
Lloyd's Register of Shipping American Bureau of Shipping Enterprise Management Magazine Labor Protection Magazine
Vice President and Executive Director Vice President and Executive Director Vice President
Executive Director
Vice Chairman Vice Chairman
Vice President and Executive Director
Vice President Executive Director
Vice President
Vice President
Member
Vice President
Vice President and Counselor Vice President
Member Member
Member
Member
Director Director
Vice President President
                       China Shipping (Group) Company

 Honors
Appendix 77
    Honor
Time
Awarded by
Awarded to
2014 China Shipping CSR Award
2014
China Shipping Gazette
China Shipping
Asia’s Top Ten Influential Brands
2014
Organizing Committee of Asia Brand Ceremony
China Shipping
China Freight Industry Awards
2014
China Communications and Transportation Association
CSCL
2013 Best Carrier Award
2014
Toy’s R Us
CSCL
Bronze Award for China’s Shipping Enterprise with Best Assets in 2014
2014
CNSS Research Center
CSCL
Featured Communist Youth League Committee of Shanghai
2014
Shanghai Municipal Committee of the Communist Youth League of China
CSDTC
A total of 18 vessels were dubbed as Safe and Trustworthy Ships
2014
Maritime Safety Administration of China
CSBC
Safe and Trustworthy Enterprise
2014
Maritime Safety Administration of China
CSBC
First-grade Transport Enterprise up to Workplace Safety Standards
2015
Ministry of Transport
CSBC
Outstanding Group in Spring Rush in 2014
2014
Ministry of Transport, Ministry of Public Security, State Administration of Work Safety, and All-China Federation of Trade Unions
CSPL
2012-2014 Model Entity of Liaoning
2014
Liaoning Provincial Government
CSPL
2013 “Kapok Cup” for Poverty Alleviation in Guangdong
2014
Leading Group of Poverty Alleviation and Development of Guangdong
Guangzhou Shipping
Outstanding Enterprise in Clean Production in Guangzhou
2014
Guangzhou Environmental Protection Bureau
CIC
Envision Energy 2014 Outstanding Logistics Service Provider
2015
Envision Energy (Jiangsu) Co., Ltd.
CSL
        2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report

 China Shipping (Group) Company

  Name: Company/Institution: Tel.: Email:
Feedback Form 79
Feedback Form
 Dear reader,
Thank you for reading China Shipping 2014 CSR Report. Your opinions and suggestions on our CSR- related tasks and this report are important for us to constantly improve the disclosure of information concerned and promote CSR management and practices. Please fill out the form below and send it to us via mail, email or fax.
     Your impression of this report
1. What do you think of the structure of this report?
2. Has this report told you enough about our CSR ideology and practices?
3. Do you think this report is reader-friendly?
4. What do you think of the content and design of this report? 5. What is your overall impression of this report?
Very good Good
So-so
Poor
      In what topic(s) are you most interested? (multiple choice)
□ Community
□ Thoroughly mentioned □ Mentioned in detail □ Mentioned □ Barely mentioned □ Not mentioned
□ CSR management □ Honest operation □ Safety □ Environment □ Employees
□ Others
 How about the disclosure of information on the topic(s)?
Your suggestions on our CSR report:
Your suggestions on our CSR practices:
(Please fill out this form and fax it to: 86-21-65966348)
2014 Corporate Social Responsibility Report